<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> <html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" ><head>

<title>The Differential Topology of Loop Spaces </title>

<meta name="Author" content="Andrew Stacey"/><link href="diffloop.css" media="all" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><script src="diffloop.js" type="text/javascript"/></head><body><p><math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline' class='dummy'><mi></mi></math></p><h2 id="section.3">3 Smoothly Does It</h2>
<p>

</p>

<p>The aim of this section is to prove that the space of smooth loops in a finite dimensional manifold is again a smooth manifold. After doing this we go on to consider the topology of the space of smooth loops. It may seem slightly topsy-turvey to consider the smooth structure before the topology. The reason is that in infinite dimensions the link between continuity and smoothness is not as tight as it is in finite dimensions (there are smooth maps which are not continuous). After considering the topology we show that various obvious maps involving loop spaces are smooth. We conclude this section with a short discussion of how to go about changing the type of loop under consideration.

</p>


<h2 id="subsection.3.1">3.1 Curvaceous Calculus</h2>
<p>

</p>

<p>The definitive reference for this section is the weighty tome&#x000A0;[<a href="diffloop8.xhtml#cite.akpm">KM97</a>]. Whilst a rewarding read for someone keen to learn about infinite dimensional analysis, it is rather intricate for someone just wanting to know the basics. Therefore, we have tried in this section to keep the material reasonably self-contained and focused solely on the case of loop spaces.

</p>

<p>The maxim in infinite dimensional analysis is:

</p><blockquote><p> Smooth is as smooth does. </p>

</blockquote><p>

</p>

<p>The problem is that once one strays outside the realm of Banach spaces then there are many different ways of defining the derivative. The <em>Historical Remarks</em> at the end of [<a href="diffloop8.xhtml#cite.akpm">KM97</a>, ch I] is a good place to start investigating. For example, one reference is quoted as listing no less than <em>twenty-five</em> inequivalent definitions of the first derivative. Even for Fr&#x000E9;chet spaces - the next "nicest" spaces after Banach spaces, of which the space <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>C</mi> <mn>&#x0221E;</mn></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>,</mo><mi>&#x0211D;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> is an example - there are three inequivalent definitions of infinite differentiability. Therefore one needs to consider what one wants from calculus before one actually defines it.

</p>

<p>For example, smoothness and continuity are no longer as tightly linked as they are in finite dimensions. Let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>E</mi></math> be an infinite dimensional locally convex topological vector space that is not normable. That is to say, the the topology on E cannot be given by a single norm. Consider the evaluation map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>E</mi><mo>&#x02032;</mo><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>E</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>&#x0211D;</mi></math>, <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>f</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>e</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>f</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>e</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>. It is a straightforward result that with the product topology on <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>E</mi><mo>&#x02032;</mo><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>E</mi></math> then this map is not continuous. However, one feels that it ought to be included in any "reasonable" calculus on <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>E</mi></math>.

</p>

<p>Even in the theory of Hilbert spaces one finds that the topology on a topological vector space is not fixed. This becomes particularly obvious when dealing with duality: on the dual space one can discuss the strong topology, the weak topology, the simple topology, the compact topology, and many, many more. The guiding rule is to select the topology most appropriate for the job in hand.

</p>

<p>Thus with open season declared on the topology and a feeling of freedom as to the definition of the derivative, one is left wondering what exactly is well-defined. The answer is: smooth curves.

</p>

<p>It is simple to define smooth curves in any locally convex topological vector space: a curve <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>c</mi><mo>:</mo><mi>&#x0211D;</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>E</mi></math> is <em>differentiable</em> if, for all <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>t</mi></math>, the derivative <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>c</mi><mo>&#x02032;</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> exists, where: </p>



<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><mi>c</mi><mo>&#x02032;</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02254;</mo><munder><mi>lim</mi> <mrow><mi>s</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mn>0</mn></mrow></munder><mfrac><mn>1</mn><mi>s</mi></mfrac><mrow><mo>(</mo><mi>c</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>+</mo><mi>s</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02212;</mo><mi>c</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>)</mo></mrow><mo>.</mo></math>
</div>
<p> It is <em>smooth</em> if all iterated derivatives exist.

</p>

<p>Providing <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>E</mi></math> satisfies a mild completeness condition (called <em><math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>c</mi> <mn>&#x0221E;</mn></msup></math>-complete</em> or <em>convenient</em> in [<a href="diffloop8.xhtml#cite.akpm">KM97</a>]), then there is an incredibly simple recognition criterion for smoothness of curves: </p>

<div class="gentheorem thm" id="theorem.3.1"><span class="title"><span class="name">Proposition</span> <span class="number">3.1</span> <span class="note">[<a href="diffloop8.xhtml#cite.akpm">KM97</a>, Theorem 2.14(4)]</span></span>

<p> Let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>E</mi></math> be a convenient locally convex space. Then a curve <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>c</mi><mo>:</mo><mi>&#x0211D;</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>E</mi></math> is smooth if and only if the curves <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>l</mi><mo>&#x02218;</mo><mi>c</mi><mo>:</mo><mi>&#x0211D;</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>&#x0211D;</mi></math> are smooth for all <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>l</mi><mo>&#x02208;</mo><msup><mi>E</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup></math>, the continuous dual of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>E</mi></math>. </p>

</div>

<p>

</p>

<p>This appears to connect the concept of smoothness firmly to that of continuity, but that is not so. The smoothness, or otherwise, of a curve depends only on what is called the <em>bornology</em> of the space <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>E</mi></math>. That is, the family of <em>bounded sets</em>. The topology can vary considerably without changing the bornology.

</p>

<p>As this is our fixed point in analysis, it seems reasonable to define everything else in terms of it. This leads to: </p>

<div class="gentheorem thm" id="theorem.3.2"><span class="title"><span class="name">Definition</span> <span class="number">3.2</span> <span class="note">[<a href="diffloop8.xhtml#cite.akpm">KM97</a>, Definition 3.11]</span></span>

<p> A function <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>f</mi><mo>:</mo><mi>E</mi><mo>&#x02287;</mo><mi>U</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>F</mi></math> defined on a <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>c</mi> <mn>&#x0221E;</mn></msup></math>-open subset <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>U</mi></math> of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>E</mi></math> is <em>smooth</em> if it takes smooth curves in <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>U</mi></math> to smooth curves in <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>F</mi></math>. </p>

</div>

<p>

</p>

<p>I have sneaked in the term "<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>c</mi> <mn>&#x0221E;</mn></msup></math>-open" about which I don't intend to go into great detail. Essentially, as we can vary the topology somewhat without changing the notion of smoothness, it makes sense to choose a particularly convenient topology. This topology is always at least as fine as the locally convex topology. For Fr&#x000E9;chet spaces, it coincides with the standard topology.

</p>

<p>To emphasise the point about smoothness being related to bornology rather than topology, we record the following result about linear maps: </p>

<div class="gentheorem thm" id="theorem.3.3"><span class="title"><span class="name">Lemma</span> <span class="number">3.3</span> <span class="note">[<a href="diffloop8.xhtml#cite.akpm">KM97</a>, Corollary 2.11]</span></span>

<p> A linear map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>l</mi><mo>:</mo><mi>E</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>F</mi></math> between locally convex vector spaces is bounded, i.e.&#x000A0;bornological, if and only if it maps smooth curves in <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>E</mi></math> to smooth curves in <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>F</mi></math>, i.e.&#x000A0;is a smooth map. </p>

</div>

<p> Thus as the evaluation map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>E</mi><mo>&#x02032;</mo><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>E</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>&#x0211D;</mi></math> is linear and bounded it is smooth, but as mentioned above is not continuous for the product topology.

</p>

<p>The crucial tool in this calculus is the <em>exponential law</em>. One important corollary of this is that in finite dimensions this notion of smooth agrees with the standard one (originally proved in [<a href="diffloop8.xhtml#cite.jb3">Bom67</a>]). To state the exponential law, we need first to note that the space of smooth functions <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>C</mi> <mn>&#x0221E;</mn></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>U</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>F</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> has a natural topology which is initial for the mappings <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>c</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mo>:</mo><msup><mi>C</mi> <mn>&#x0221E;</mn></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>U</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>F</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msup><mi>C</mi> <mn>&#x0221E;</mn></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x0211D;</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>F</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> for <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>c</mi><mo>&#x02208;</mo><msup><mi>C</mi> <mn>&#x0221E;</mn></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x0211D;</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>U</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>.

</p>

<div class="gentheorem thm" id="theorem.3.4"><span class="title"><span class="name">Theorem</span> <span class="number">3.4</span> <span class="note">Exponential Law [<a href="diffloop8.xhtml#cite.akpm">KM97</a>, Theorem 3.12]</span></span>

<p> Let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>U</mi> <mi>i</mi></msub><mo>&#x02286;</mo><msub><mi>E</mi> <mi>i</mi></msub></math> be <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>c</mi> <mn>&#x0221E;</mn></msup></math>-open subsets. Then <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>C</mi> <mn>&#x0221E;</mn></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mn>2</mn></msub><mo>,</mo><mi>F</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02245;</mo><msup><mi>C</mi> <mn>&#x0221E;</mn></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo>,</mo><msup><mi>C</mi> <mn>&#x0221E;</mn></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mn>2</mn></msub><mo>,</mo><mi>F</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>. </p>

</div>
<p>

</p>

<p>This is called the exponential law because it can be written as <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>F</mi> <mrow><msub><mi>U</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mn>2</mn></msub></mrow></msup><mo>&#x02245;</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>F</mi> <mrow><msub><mi>U</mi> <mn>2</mn></msub></mrow></msup><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mrow><msub><mi>U</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub></mrow></msup></math>.

</p>

<p>We have now defined smoothness without reference to the derivative. It is rather reassuring to discover that the derivative of a smooth map is still definable:

</p>

<div class="gentheorem thm" id="theorem.3.5"><span class="title"><span class="name">Theorem</span> <span class="number">3.5</span> <span class="note">[<a href="diffloop8.xhtml#cite.akpm">KM97</a>, Theorem 3.18]</span></span>

<p> Let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>E</mi></math> and <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>F</mi></math> be locally convex spaces, and let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>U</mi><mo>&#x02286;</mo><mi>E</mi></math> be <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>c</mi> <mn>&#x0221E;</mn></msup></math>-open. Then the differentiation operator </p>



<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><mrow><mtable rowspacing="1.0ex"><mtr><mtd><mi>d</mi><mo>:</mo><msup><mi>C</mi> <mn>&#x0221E;</mn></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>U</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>F</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msup><mi>C</mi> <mn>&#x0221E;</mn></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>U</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>&#x02112;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>E</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>F</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>,</mo></mtd></mtr> <mtr><mtd><mi>d</mi><mi>f</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>x</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>v</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02254;</mo><munder><mi>lim</mi> <mrow><mi>t</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mn>0</mn></mrow></munder><mfrac><mrow><mi>f</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>x</mi><mo>+</mo><mi>t</mi><mi>v</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02212;</mo><mi>f</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>x</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow><mi>t</mi></mfrac><mo>,</mo></mtd></mtr></mtable></mrow></math>
</div>



<p> exists and is bounded (smooth). Also the chain rule holds: </p>



<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><mi>d</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>f</mi><mo>&#x02218;</mo><mi>g</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>x</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mi>v</mi><mo>=</mo><mi>d</mi><mi>f</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>g</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>x</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mi>d</mi><mi>g</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>x</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mi>v</mi><mo>.</mo></math>
</div>



<p> </p>

</div>

<p>

</p>

<p>Here, <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x02112;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>E</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>F</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> is the space of all <em>bounded</em> linear maps from <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>E</mi></math> to <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>F</mi></math>. We differ from [<a href="diffloop8.xhtml#cite.akpm">KM97</a>] in notation for this space as we have reserved the letter "<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi></math>" for loops and thus use "<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x02112;</mi></math>" for linear maps. It is a closed subspace of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>C</mi> <mn>&#x0221E;</mn></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>E</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>F</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> and is topologised as such. Essentially, this result says that the directional derivatives (which there is no problem <em>defining</em>, just problems with properties) fit together nicely to define the global derivative.

</p>


<h2 id="subsection.3.2">3.2 Euclidean Loop Spaces</h2>
<p>

</p>

<p>Before we can consider an arbitrary loop space we need to examine what will become the model space, <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></math>. For those who like lists, here is a list of the functional analysis properties that <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></math> satisfies: </p>
<ol> <li id="Item.39">

<p><math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></math> is a Baire, barrelled, bornological, complete, convenient, Fr&#x000E9;chet, infrabarrelled, Mackey, metrisable, Montel, nuclear, quasi-complete, reflexive, Schwartz, semi-reflexive, separable, space. Also, the bidual map is a topological isomorphism, the <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>c</mi> <mn>&#x0221E;</mn></msup></math> topology referred to above is the standard topology, and it has many nice properties involving tensor products.

</p>

</li><li id="Item.40">

<p>the dual space, <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mo>*</mo></msup></math> (with the strong topology), is all of the same except that it is not a Fr&#x000E9;chet space - and hence not metrisable - nor is it a Baire space. Also, the strong topology agrees with the Mackey topology and with the inductive topology. </p>

</li></ol>

<p>

</p>

<p>We are more interested in the calculus properties of this space, although the "nice properties involving tensor products" are an important factor in [<a href="diffloop8.xhtml#cite.math.DG0505077">Sta</a>]. We shall start with the topology on <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></math>. As we noted in the previous section, this is also the natural topology to consider when dealing with smooth maps on <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></math>. To define it, we first define the topology on the space <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>C</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>,</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> of continuous maps.

</p>

<div class="gentheorem thm" id="theorem.3.6"><span class="title"><span class="name">Definition</span> <span class="number">3.6</span></span>

<p>A subbasis for the topology on <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>C</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>,</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> consists of the sets of the form: </p>



<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><mo stretchy="false">{</mo><mi>f</mi><mo>&#x02208;</mo><mi>C</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>,</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>:</mo><mi>f</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>K</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02286;</mo><mi>U</mi><mo stretchy="false">}</mo></math>
</div>



<p> where <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>K</mi><mo>&#x02286;</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></math> is compact and <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>U</mi><mo>&#x02286;</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></math> is open. This is called the <em>compact-open</em> topology. </p>

</div>

<p>

</p>

<p>In fact, <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>C</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>,</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> is a Banach space with supremum norm: </p>



<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><msub><mrow><mo>&#x02225;</mo><mi>&#x003B3;</mi><mo>&#x02225;</mo></mrow> <mn>&#x0221E;</mn></msub><mo>=</mo><mi>sup</mi><mo stretchy="false">{</mo><mrow><mo>&#x02225;</mo><mi>&#x003B3;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02225;</mo></mrow><mo>:</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>&#x02208;</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo stretchy="false">}</mo><mo>.</mo></math>
</div>



<p>

</p>

<p>The topology on the smooth loop space is then defined as the topology initial for the maps <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>C</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>,</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mrow><mi>k</mi><mi>n</mi></mrow></msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> given by: </p>
<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><mi>&#x003B3;</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mo maxsize="1.2em" minsize="1.2em">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B3;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>,</mo><mi>&#x003B3;</mi><mo>&#x02032;</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>,</mo><mi>&#x02026;</mi><mo>,</mo><msup><mi>&#x003B3;</mi> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>k</mi><mo>&#x02212;</mo><mn>1</mn><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo maxsize="1.2em" minsize="1.2em">)</mo><mo>.</mo></math>
</div>



<p>

</p>

<p>If we replace continuous functions by some other type, for example: square-integrable, we end up with the same topology on <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></math>. This is an example of how smoothness "smooths out" any initial irregularities in definition.

</p>

<p>We now turn to the smooth structure of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></math>. Ultimately, we need to know enough about the smooth maps on <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></math> to decide whether or not the transition functions of an arbitrary loop space are smooth. These transition functions have a particularly simple structure and so the task is easier than that of trying to characterise <em>all</em> smooth maps between open subsets of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></math>.

</p>

<p>We start by generalising the exponential law. The problem with it as stated in Theorem&#x000A0;<a href="diffloop4.xhtml#theorem.3.4">3.4</a> is that the domains allowed are open subsets of some linear space. We wish to use <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></math> as one of the domains. That is, we wish to show: </p>

<div class="gentheorem thm" id="theorem.3.7"><span class="title"><span class="name">Proposition</span> <span class="number">3.7</span></span>

<p> A curve <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>c</mi><mo>:</mo><mi>&#x0211D;</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>m</mi></msup></math> is smooth if and only if its adjoint <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>c</mi> <mo>&#x02228;</mo></msup><mo>:</mo><mi>&#x0211D;</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>m</mi></msup></math> is smooth. </p>

</div>

<p>

</p>

<div class="proof" ><span class="title">Proof</span> <a class="control" href="diffloop1.xhtml#Doc-Start" onclick="toggleProof(this); return false;">(Toggle proof)</a><div class="body">

<p>Consider the quotient mapping <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x0211D;</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></math>. This map completely determines the smooth structure of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></math> in that a map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>m</mi></msup></math> is smooth if and only if the composite <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x0211D;</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>m</mi></msup></math> is smooth. Similarly, <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x0211D;</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>m</mi></msup></math> is smooth if and only if <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x0211D;</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>&#x0211D;</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>m</mi></msup></math> is smooth.

</p>

<p>Thus given a curve <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>c</mi><mo>:</mo><mi>&#x0211D;</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>m</mi></msup></math> with adjoint <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>c</mi> <mo>&#x02228;</mo></msup><mo>:</mo><mi>&#x0211D;</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>m</mi></msup></math> we get a curve <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>c</mi> <mi>&#x0211D;</mi></msub><mo>:</mo><mi>&#x0211D;</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msup><mi>C</mi> <mn>&#x0221E;</mn></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x0211D;</mi><mo>,</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>m</mi></msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> and a map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msubsup><mi>c</mi> <mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mo>&#x02228;</mo></msubsup><mo>:</mo><mi>&#x0211D;</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>&#x0211D;</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>m</mi></msup></math>. As both use the same projection <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x0211D;</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></math>, it is not hard to see that the adjoint of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>c</mi> <mi>&#x0211D;</mi></msub></math> is <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msubsup><mi>c</mi> <mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mo>&#x02228;</mo></msubsup></math>; that is, <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msubsup><mi>c</mi> <mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mo>&#x02228;</mo></msubsup><mo>=</mo><msubsup><mi>c</mi> <mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mo>&#x02228;</mo></msubsup></math>. Thus by the standard exponential theorem, Theorem&#x000A0;<a href="diffloop4.xhtml#theorem.3.4">3.4</a>, <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>c</mi> <mi>&#x0211D;</mi></msub></math> is smooth if and only if <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msubsup><mi>c</mi> <mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mo>&#x02228;</mo></msubsup></math> is smooth. By the above, <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msubsup><mi>c</mi> <mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mo>&#x02228;</mo></msubsup></math> is smooth if and only if <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>c</mi> <mo>&#x02228;</mo></msup></math> is smooth. Thus it remains to show that <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>c</mi></math> is smooth if and only if <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>c</mi> <mi>&#x0211D;</mi></msub></math> is smooth.

</p>

<p>Now the map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x0211D;</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></math> exhibits <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>m</mi></msup></math> as a linear subspace of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>C</mi> <mn>&#x0221E;</mn></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x0211D;</mi><mo>,</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>m</mi></msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> in that the induced map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>m</mi></msup><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msup><mi>C</mi> <mn>&#x0221E;</mn></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x0211D;</mi><mo>,</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>m</mi></msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> is a homeomorphism onto its image. The image is obviously a closed subspace and hence <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>c</mi> <mn>&#x0221E;</mn></msup></math>-closed. Therefore, by [<a href="diffloop8.xhtml#cite.akpm">KM97</a>, Lemma 3.8], a curve in <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>m</mi></msup></math> is smooth if and only if it is smooth as a curve in <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>C</mi> <mn>&#x0221E;</mn></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x0211D;</mi><mo>,</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>m</mi></msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>. </p>

</div></div>

<p>

</p>

<p>The type of function that we shall examine is the following: let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>V</mi><mo>&#x02286;</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></math> and <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>W</mi><mo>&#x02286;</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>m</mi></msup></math> be open subsets, and let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003C8;</mi><mo>:</mo><mi>V</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>W</mi></math> be a map of spaces over <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></math>; here, <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>k</mi></msup></math> has the obvious structure of a space over <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></math> and a subspace of a space over <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></math> has the obvious inherited structure.

</p>

<div class="gentheorem thm" id="theorem.3.8"><span class="title"><span class="name">Lemma</span> <span class="number">3.8</span></span>

<p> Under the natural identification <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>k</mi></msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02245;</mo><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>k</mi></msup></math>, <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>V</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> and <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>W</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> are open subsets of the respective loop spaces and <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>&#x003C8;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup></math> is a smooth map. </p>
</div>

<p>

</p>

<p>Note that <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>V</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> is empty unless the map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>V</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></math> is surjective.

</p>

<div class="proof" ><span class="title">Proof</span> <a class="control" href="diffloop1.xhtml#Doc-Start" onclick="toggleProof(this); return false;">(Toggle proof)</a><div class="body">

<p>That <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>V</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> identifies with an open subset of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></math> is obvious as it is true for the topology induced by the inclusion into the space of continuous loops.

</p>

<p>To show that <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>&#x003C8;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup></math> is smooth, it is sufficient to take the case where <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>W</mi><mo>=</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>m</mi></msup></math>. This means that we are considering the target to be <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></math> via the bijection <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>p</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup><mo>:</mo><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>m</mi></msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>m</mi></msup></math>. Thus we need to show that if <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>c</mi><mo>:</mo><mi>&#x0211D;</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>V</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> is smooth then <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>p</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup><mo>&#x02218;</mo><msup><mi>&#x003C8;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup><mo>&#x02218;</mo><mi>c</mi><mo>:</mo><mi>&#x0211D;</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>m</mi></msup></math> is smooth.

</p>

<p>By the exponential law, it is sufficient to consider the adjoint of this. Using Lemma&#x000A0;<a href="diffloop3.xhtml#theorem.2.4">2.4</a> we see that this is <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>p</mi><mo>&#x02218;</mo><mi>&#x003C8;</mi><mo>&#x02218;</mo><msup><mi>c</mi> <mo>&#x02228;</mo></msup><mo>:</mo><mi>&#x0211D;</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>m</mi></msup></math>. This is smooth and hence <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>p</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup><mo>&#x02218;</mo><msup><mi>&#x003C8;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup></math> takes smooth maps to smooth maps. Thus <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>&#x003C8;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup></math> is smooth. </p>

</div></div>

<p>

</p>

<p>Let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>d</mi> <mi>v</mi></msub><mi>&#x003C8;</mi><mo>:</mo><mi>V</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>W</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>m</mi></msup></math> be the vertical derivative of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003C8;</mi></math>.

</p>

<div class="gentheorem thm" id="theorem.3.9"><span class="title"><span class="name">Lemma</span> <span class="number">3.9</span></span>

<p> <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>d</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>&#x003C8;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msub><mi>d</mi> <mi>v</mi></msub><mi>&#x003C8;</mi><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mi>L</mi></msup></math>. </p>

</div>

<p>

</p>

<div class="proof" ><span class="title">Proof</span> <a class="control" href="diffloop1.xhtml#Doc-Start" onclick="toggleProof(this); return false;">(Toggle proof)</a><div class="body">

<p>Recall that the derivative of a smooth function is determined by the directional derivatives. Using the identification of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>k</mi></msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> with <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>k</mi></msup></math>, the derivative of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>&#x003C8;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup></math> is a smooth map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>V</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>&#x02112;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup><mo>,</mo><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>m</mi></msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>. So the derivative at a loop <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo>&#x02208;</mo><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>V</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> in the direction of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo>&#x02208;</mo><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></math> is an element of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>m</mi></msup></math> which is the limit of the following net indexed by <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>s</mi><mo>&#x02208;</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mo lspace="verythinmathspace" rspace="0em">+</mo></msup></math>: </p>



<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><mfrac><mrow><msup><mi>&#x003C8;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo>+</mo><mi>s</mi><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02212;</mo><msup><mi>&#x003C8;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow><mi>s</mi></mfrac><mo>.</mo></math>
</div>



<p> Now evaluation at time <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>t</mi></math> is a continuous linear map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></math> which takes this net to: </p>
<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><mfrac><mrow><msup><mi>&#x003C8;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo>+</mo><mi>s</mi><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02212;</mo><msup><mi>&#x003C8;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow><mi>s</mi></mfrac><mo>=</mo><mfrac><mrow><mi>&#x003C8;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>+</mo><mi>s</mi><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02212;</mo><mi>&#x003C8;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow><mi>s</mi></mfrac><mo>.</mo></math>
</div>



<p> This is precisely the difference quotient which tends to the vertical derivative of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003C8;</mi></math> at <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> in the direction <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>. Since a loop is completely determined by its values at each time, <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>d</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>&#x003C8;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mi>&#x003B2;</mi></math> is the same loop as <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>t</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msub><mi>d</mi> <mi>v</mi></msub><mi>&#x003C8;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>. Hence: </p>



<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><mi>d</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>&#x003C8;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo>=</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msub><mi>d</mi> <mi>v</mi></msub><mi>&#x003C8;</mi><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mi>L</mi></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo>.</mo></math>
</div>



<p> </p>

</div></div>

<p>

</p>

<div class="gentheorem thm" id="theorem.3.10"><span class="title"><span class="name">Corollary</span> <span class="number">3.10</span></span>

<p>The map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>d</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>&#x003C8;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>:</mo><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>m</mi></msup></math> is <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>&#x0211D;</mi></math>-linear. </p>

</div>

<p>

</p>

<div class="proof" ><span class="title">Proof</span> <a class="control" href="diffloop1.xhtml#Doc-Start" onclick="toggleProof(this); return false;">(Toggle proof)</a><div class="body">

<p>Since <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>d</mi><msup><mi>&#x003C8;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> is <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x0211D;</mi></math>-linear, the part to prove in the statement about linearity is that <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>d</mi><msup><mi>&#x003C8;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> commutes with the action of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>&#x0211D;</mi></math>. Let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003BD;</mi><mo>&#x02208;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>&#x0211D;</mi></math>, then: </p>



<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><mrow><mtable columnalign="right left right left right left right left right left" columnspacing="0em"><mtr><mtd><mi>d</mi><msup><mi>&#x003C8;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003BD;</mi><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mtd> <mtd><mo>=</mo><msub><mi>d</mi> <mi>v</mi></msub><mi>&#x003C8;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003BD;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mtd></mtr> <mtr><mtd></mtd> <mtd><mo>=</mo><mi>&#x003BD;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><msub><mi>d</mi> <mi>v</mi></msub><mi>&#x003C8;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mtd></mtr> <mtr><mtd></mtd> <mtd><mo>=</mo><mo maxsize="1.2em" minsize="1.2em">(</mo><mi>&#x003BD;</mi><mi>d</mi><msup><mi>&#x003C8;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo maxsize="1.2em" minsize="1.2em">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>.</mo></mtd></mtr></mtable></mrow></math>
</div>



<p> Hence <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>d</mi><msup><mi>&#x003C8;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003BD;</mi><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><mi>&#x003BD;</mi><mi>d</mi><msup><mi>&#x003C8;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mi>&#x003B2;</mi></math> as required. </p>

</div></div>

<p>
</p>

<div class="gentheorem thm" id="theorem.3.11"><span class="title"><span class="name">Lemma</span> <span class="number">3.11</span></span>

<p> Now suppose that <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>n</mi><mo>=</mo><mi>m</mi></math> and that <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003C8;</mi><mo>:</mo><mi>V</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>W</mi></math> is a diffeomorphism with inverse <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x03D5;</mi><mo>:</mo><mi>W</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>V</mi></math>. Then <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>&#x003C8;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup><mo>:</mo><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>V</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>W</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> is a diffeomorphism with inverse <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>&#x03D5;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup></math>. </p>

</div>

<p>

</p>

<div class="proof" ><span class="title">Proof</span> <a class="control" href="diffloop1.xhtml#Doc-Start" onclick="toggleProof(this); return false;">(Toggle proof)</a><div class="body">

<p>Both <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>&#x003C8;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup></math> and <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>&#x03D5;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup></math> are smooth. By Property&#x000A0;<a href="diffloop3.xhtml#Item.32">4</a> of Lemma&#x000A0;<a href="diffloop3.xhtml#theorem.2.4">2.4</a>, the compositions <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>&#x003C8;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup><mo>&#x02218;</mo><msup><mi>&#x03D5;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup></math> and <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>&#x03D5;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup><mo>&#x02218;</mo><msup><mi>&#x003C8;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup></math> are the identities on their domains. Hence <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>&#x003C8;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup></math> is a diffeomorphism with inver <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>&#x03D5;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup></math>. </p>

</div></div>

<p>

</p>

<p>This has a few nice consequences that we shall exploit. Most are things that jolly well ought to be true, but given that the definition of smooth is probably unfamiliar it's as well to spell out the details.

</p>

<div class="gentheorem thm" id="theorem.3.12"><span class="title"><span class="name">Corollary</span> <span class="number">3.12</span></span>

<p> </p>

<ol> <li id="Item.41">

<p>Let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo>:</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mo lspace="0em" rspace="thinmathspace">Diff</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> be a smooth map (the group <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo lspace="0em" rspace="thinmathspace">Diff</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> inherits a smooth structure from <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>C</mi> <mn>&#x0221E;</mn></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup><mo>,</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>). Then the induced map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></math> given by <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B3;</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mi>&#x003B3;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> is a diffeomorphism.

</p>

</li><li id="Item.42">

<p>Let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>E</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></math> be a smooth, orientable vector bundle. Then the space of sections, <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>E</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>, has a natural smooth structure.

</p>

</li><li id="Item.43">

<p>The results above generalise to orientable smooth vector bundles as follows: let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>E</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>F</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></math> be orientable smooth vector bundles. Let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>V</mi><mo>&#x02286;</mo><mi>E</mi></math> and <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>W</mi><mo>&#x02286;</mo><mi>F</mi></math> be open subsets. Let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003C8;</mi><mo>:</mo><mi>V</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>W</mi></math> be a smooth map covering the identity on <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></math>. Then <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>&#x003C8;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup><mo>:</mo><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>V</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>W</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> is smooth with derivative the loop of the vertical derivative of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003C8;</mi></math>. If <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003C8;</mi></math> is a diffeomorphism with inverse <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x03D5;</mi></math> then <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>&#x003C8;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup></math> is a diffeomorphism with inverse <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>&#x03D5;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup></math>. </p>

</li></ol>

<p> </p>

</div>

<p>

</p>

<p>The key in the second is to choose a diffeomorphism of (the total space of) <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>E</mi></math> with <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></math> and so identify the space of sections of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>E</mi></math> with <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></math>. This defines a smooth structure on this space of sections which is independent of the diffeomorphism chosen by the first result.

</p>
<p>The same results hold for non-orientable bundles but are a little fiddly to prove. One has to consider what are called <em>twisted</em> loop spaces. These add no analytic difficulties, but perhaps add one or two conceptual ones so we shall avoid using them.

</p>


<h2 id="subsection.3.3">3.3 The Smooth Structure of an Arbitrary Loop Space</h2>
<p>

</p>

<p>We are now able to consider the smooth loop space of a finite dimensional smooth manifold, <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>M</mi></math>. We shall make two assumptions on the type of manifold that we consider: one necessary and one for convenience. </p>

<ol> <li id="Item.44">

<p><math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo>&#x02202;</mo><mi>M</mi><mo>=</mo><mi>&#x02205;</mi></math>.

</p>

<p>The loop space of a manifold with boundary is a complicated object. To put it simply, it is not true that <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>=</mo><mi>L</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>M</mi><mspace width="-0.1667em"></mspace><mo stretchy="false">&#xFE68;</mo><mspace width="-0.1667em"></mspace><mo>&#x02202;</mo><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x0222A;</mo><mi>L</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mo>&#x02202;</mo><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>. The best description of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math> in this case is as a stratified space, with strata indexed by closed subspaces of the circle. The layer corresponding to <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>F</mi><mo>&#x02286;</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></math> consists of those loops <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo>:</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>M</mi></math> such that <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mrow><mo lspace="verythinmathspace" rspace="0em">&#x02212;</mo><mn>1</mn></mrow></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mo>&#x02202;</mo><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><mi>F</mi></math>. The top level, corresponding to the empty set, is <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>M</mi><mspace width="-0.1667em"></mspace><mo stretchy="false">&#xFE68;</mo><mspace width="-0.1667em"></mspace><mo>&#x02202;</mo><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>. The next level consists of all loops which intersect <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo>&#x02202;</mo><mi>M</mi></math> at one point, and so on.

</p>

</li><li id="Item.45">

<p><math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>M</mi></math> is orientable.

</p>

<p>This allows us to stay out of the twisted realm. We shall not actually use this in the analysis, it is merely to make this account reasonably self-contained. </p>

</li></ol>

<p>

</p>

<p>The key tool for defining the charts for the loop space is the notion of a <em>local addition</em> on <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>M</mi></math>, cf&#x000A0;[<a href="diffloop8.xhtml#cite.akpm">KM97</a>, &#xa7;42.4]: </p>

<div class="gentheorem thm" id="theorem.3.13"><span class="title"><span class="name">Definition</span> <span class="number">3.13</span></span>

<p> A <em>local addition</em> on <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>M</mi></math> consists of a smooth map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B7;</mi><mo>:</mo><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>M</mi></math> such that </p>

<ol> <li id="Item.46">

<p>the composition of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B7;</mi></math> with the zero section is the identity on <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>M</mi></math>, and

</p>

</li><li id="Item.47">

<p>there exists an open neighbourhood <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>V</mi></math> of the diagonal in <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>M</mi></math> such that the map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003C0;</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>&#x003B7;</mi><mo>:</mo><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>M</mi></math> is a diffeomorphism onto <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>V</mi></math>. </p>

</li></ol>

<p> </p>

</div>

<p>
</p>

<p>In [<a href="diffloop8.xhtml#cite.akpm">KM97</a>, &#xa7;42.4], the above is called a <em>globally defined local addition</em> but the difference is not important for us. We shall later want to relax this further by replacing the tangent bundle by an arbitrary vector bundle (which must, <em>a fortiori</em>, be isomorphic to the tangent bundle) but for now we stick with the tangent bundle to keep things conceptually simple. The following result is contained in the discussion following the definition of a local addition in [<a href="diffloop8.xhtml#cite.akpm">KM97</a>, &#xa7;42.4]:

</p>

<div class="gentheorem thm" id="theorem.3.14"><span class="title"><span class="name">Proposition</span> <span class="number">3.14</span></span>

<p>Any finite dimensional manifold without boundary admits a local addition. </p>

</div>

<p>

</p>

<div class="proof" ><span class="title">Proof</span> <a class="control" href="diffloop1.xhtml#Doc-Start" onclick="toggleProof(this); return false;">(Toggle proof)</a><div class="body">

<p>Without going into great detail, the essentials of the proof are that the exponential map coming from a Riemannian structure almost defines a local addition except that the domain of the diffeomorphism is not the whole tangent space (except in a few simple cases) but a neighbourhood of the zero section. The proof is completed by exhibiting a smooth fibre-preserving embedding of the total space of the tangent bundle into the domain of the diffeomorphism. The composition of this with the exponential map is the required local addition. </p>

</div></div>

<p>

</p>

<p>Let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B7;</mi><mo>:</mo><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>M</mi></math> be a local addition on <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>M</mi></math>. Let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>V</mi><mo>&#x02286;</mo><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>M</mi></math> be the image of the map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003C0;</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>&#x003B7;</mi><mo>:</mo><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>M</mi></math>. Although as yet we know nothing about the topologies of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> or of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>V</mi></math>, we can at least say that the looped map, <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003C0;</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>&#x003B7;</mi><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mi>L</mi></msup></math>, is a bijection.

</p>

<div class="gentheorem thm" id="theorem.3.15"><span class="title"><span class="name">Lemma</span> <span class="number">3.15</span></span>

<p>Let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo>&#x02208;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math>. Define the set <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>U</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub><mo>&#x02286;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math> by: </p>



<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><msub><mi>U</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub><mo>&#x02254;</mo><mo stretchy="false">{</mo><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo>&#x02208;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>:</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02208;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>V</mi><mo stretchy="false">}</mo><mo>.</mo></math>
</div>



<p> Then the preimage of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">{</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">}</mo><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub></math> under <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003C0;</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>&#x003B7;</mi><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mi>L</mi></msup></math> is naturally identified with <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>. In particular, the zero section of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> maps to <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02208;</mo><mo stretchy="false">{</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">}</mo><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub></math>. </p>

</div>

<p>

</p>

<div class="proof" ><span class="title">Proof</span> <a class="control" href="diffloop1.xhtml#Doc-Start" onclick="toggleProof(this); return false;">(Toggle proof)</a><div class="body">

<p>We claim that there is a diagram: </p>



<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><mrow><mtable rowspacing="0.5ex"><mtr><mtd><mi>L</mi><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></mtd> <mtd><mover><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mrow><mi>&#x003C0;</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>&#x003B7;</mi></mrow></mover></mtd> <mtd><mi>L</mi><mi>V</mi></mtd></mtr> <mtr><mtd><mo stretchy="false">&#x02191;</mo></mtd> <mtd></mtd> <mtd><mstyle scriptlevel="1"><mpadded width="0" lspace="-100%width"><mrow><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow></mpadded><mo stretchy="false">&#x02191;</mo><mstyle scriptlevel="1"><mpadded width="0"><mrow></mrow></mpadded></mstyle></mstyle></mtd></mtr> <mtr><mtd><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mtd> <mtd></mtd> <mtd><msub><mi>U</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub><mpadded width="0"><mo>,</mo></mpadded></mtd></mtr></mtable></mrow></math>
</div>



<p> such that the bijection at the top takes the image of the left-hand vertical map to the image of the right-hand one. Both of the vertical maps are injective - the right-hand one obviously so, we shall investigate the left-hand one in a moment - and thus the bijection <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003C0;</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>&#x003B7;</mi><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mi>L</mi></msup></math> induces a bijection from the lower left to the lower right.

</p>

<p>The left-hand vertical map, <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math>, is defined as follows: the total space <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> is: </p>



<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><mo stretchy="false">{</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>v</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02208;</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>:</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><mi>&#x003C0;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>v</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">}</mo><mo>.</mo></math>
</div>



<p> It is an embedded submanifold of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math>. Therefore a map into <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> is smooth if and only if the compositions with the projections to <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></math> and to <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> are smooth. Now a map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> is a section if and only if it projects to the identity on <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></math>. Therefore there is a bijection (of sets): </p>



<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><mrow><mtable columnalign="right left right left right left right left right left" columnspacing="0em"><mtr><mtd><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mtd> <mtd><mo>&#x02245;</mo><mo stretchy="false">{</mo><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo>&#x02208;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>:</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02208;</mo><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mtext> for all </mtext><mi>t</mi><mo>&#x02208;</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo stretchy="false">}</mo></mtd></mtr> <mtr><mtd></mtd> <mtd><mo>=</mo><mo stretchy="false">{</mo><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo>&#x02208;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>:</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><mi>&#x003C0;</mi><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mtext> for all </mtext><mi>t</mi><mo>&#x02208;</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo stretchy="false">}</mo></mtd></mtr> <mtr><mtd></mtd> <mtd><mo>=</mo><mo stretchy="false">{</mo><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo>&#x02208;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>:</mo><msup><mi>&#x003C0;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo>=</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">}</mo><mo>=</mo><mo>:</mo><msub><mi>L</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>.</mo></mtd></mtr></mtable></mrow></math>
</div>



<p> In particular, the map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> is injective.

</p>

<p>We apply <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003C0;</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>&#x003B7;</mi><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mi>L</mi></msup></math> to the defining condition for <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>L</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> and see that <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>L</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> is the preimage under this map of everything of the form <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>&#x003B3;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> in <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>V</mi></math>. By construction, <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B3;</mi><mo>&#x02208;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math> is such that <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>&#x003B3;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02208;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>V</mi></math> if and only if <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B3;</mi><mo>&#x02208;</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub></math>. Hence <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003C0;</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>&#x003B7;</mi><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mi>L</mi></msup></math> identifies <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>L</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> with <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">{</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">}</mo><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub></math>.

</p>

<p>Finally, note that the zero section of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> maps to the image of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B1;</mi></math> under the zero section of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math>. Since <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B7;</mi></math> composed with the zero section of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> is the identity on <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>M</mi></math>, the image of the zero section of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> in <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>V</mi></math> is <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> as required. </p>

</div></div>

<p>

</p>

<div class="gentheorem thm" id="theorem.3.16"><span class="title"><span class="name">Definition</span> <span class="number">3.16</span></span>

<p>Let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub><mo>:</mo><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub></math> be the resulting bijection. </p>

</div>
<p>

</p>

<p>In detail, this map is as follows: let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo>&#x02208;</mo><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> and let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mover><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x002DC;</mo></mover></math> be the corresponding loop in <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math>, so <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mover><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x002DC;</mo></mover><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>. Then <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003C0;</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>&#x003B7;</mi><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mi>L</mi></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mover><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x002DC;</mo></mover><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo>,</mo><msup><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mover><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x002DC;</mo></mover><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> so <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><msup><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mover><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x002DC;</mo></mover><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>.

</p>

<p>The domains of these functions are sections over <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></math> of smooth orientable finite dimensional vector bundles. We equip these with the smooth structure as in Corollary&#x000A0;<a href="diffloop4.xhtml#theorem.3.12">3.12</a>. On the other side, since <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo>&#x02208;</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub></math>, the family <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">{</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub><mo stretchy="false">}</mo></math> covers the loop space of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>M</mi></math>. Thus we have an open covering of the loop space by sets each of which we can identify with a linear space with a chosen smooth structure.

</p>

<p>We now turn to the investigation of the transition functions. We shall prove a slightly stronger result than is needed at this moment in that we shall allow the local addition to vary. As well as showing that the transition functions are smooth this will show that the maximal atlas so defined contains all such charts with any choice of local addition.

</p>

<p>Let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo>,</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mn>2</mn></msub><mo>:</mo><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>M</mi></math> be local additions with corresponding neighbourhoods <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>V</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo>,</mo><msub><mi>V</mi> <mn>2</mn></msub></math> of the diagonal in <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>M</mi></math>. Let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo>,</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mn>2</mn></msub></math> be smooth loops in <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>M</mi></math>. Let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo>:</mo><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msubsup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mn>1</mn> <mo>*</mo></msubsup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub></math>, <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mn>2</mn></msub><mo>:</mo><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msubsup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mn>2</mn> <mo>*</mo></msubsup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mn>2</mn></msub></math> be the corresponding charts.

</p>

<div class="gentheorem thm" id="theorem.3.17"><span class="title"><span class="name">Lemma</span> <span class="number">3.17</span></span>

<p>Let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>W</mi> <mrow><mn>1</mn><mn>2</mn></mrow></msub><mo>&#x02286;</mo><msubsup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mn>1</mn> <mo>*</mo></msubsup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> be the set: </p>



<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><mo stretchy="false">{</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>v</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02208;</mo><msubsup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mn>1</mn> <mo>*</mo></msubsup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>:</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mn>2</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>,</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>v</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02208;</mo><msub><mi>V</mi> <mn>2</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">}</mo><mo>.</mo></math>
</div>



<p> Then <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>W</mi> <mrow><mn>1</mn><mn>2</mn></mrow></msub></math> is open and <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msubsup><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mn>1</mn> <mrow><mo lspace="verythinmathspace" rspace="0em">&#x02212;</mo><mn>1</mn></mrow></msubsup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo>&#x02229;</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mn>2</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msub><mi>W</mi> <mrow><mn>1</mn><mn>2</mn></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>. </p>

</div>

<p>

</p>

<div class="proof" ><span class="title">Proof</span> <a class="control" href="diffloop1.xhtml#Doc-Start" onclick="toggleProof(this); return false;">(Toggle proof)</a><div class="body">

<p>The set <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>W</mi> <mrow><mn>1</mn><mn>2</mn></mrow></msub></math> is open as it is the preimage of an open set via a continuous map. To show the second statement we need to prove that <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B3;</mi><mo>&#x02208;</mo><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msubsup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mn>1</mn> <mo>*</mo></msubsup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> takes values in <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>W</mi> <mrow><mn>1</mn><mn>2</mn></mrow></msub></math> if and only if <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B3;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02208;</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mn>2</mn></msub></math> (by construction we already have <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B3;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02208;</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub></math>).

</p>

<p>So let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B3;</mi><mo>&#x02208;</mo><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> and let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mover><mi>&#x003B3;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x002DC;</mo></mover></math> be the image of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B3;</mi></math> in <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math>. Thus <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B3;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mover><mi>&#x003B3;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x002DC;</mo></mover><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>. Now <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B3;</mi></math> takes values in <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>W</mi> <mrow><mn>1</mn><mn>2</mn></mrow></msub></math> if and only if: </p>



<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><mo maxsize="1.2em" minsize="1.2em">(</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mn>2</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>,</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mover><mi>&#x003B3;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x002DC;</mo></mover><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo maxsize="1.2em" minsize="1.2em">)</mo><mo>&#x02208;</mo><msub><mi>V</mi> <mn>2</mn></msub></math>
</div>
<p> for all <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>t</mi><mo>&#x02208;</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></math>. That is to say, if and only if <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mn>2</mn></msub><mo>,</mo><msubsup><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mn>1</mn> <mi>L</mi></msubsup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mover><mi>&#x003B3;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x002DC;</mo></mover><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02208;</mo><mi>L</mi><msub><mi>V</mi> <mn>2</mn></msub></math>. By definition, this is equivalent to the statement that <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msubsup><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mn>1</mn> <mi>L</mi></msubsup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mover><mi>&#x003B3;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x002DC;</mo></mover><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02208;</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mn>2</mn></msub></math>. Now <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msubsup><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mn>1</mn> <mi>L</mi></msubsup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mover><mi>&#x003B3;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x002DC;</mo></mover><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><msub><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B3;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> so <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B3;</mi></math> takes values in <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>W</mi> <mrow><mn>1</mn><mn>2</mn></mrow></msub></math> if and only if <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B3;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02208;</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo>&#x02229;</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mn>2</mn></msub></math>. </p>

</div></div>

<p>

</p>

<div class="gentheorem thm" id="theorem.3.18"><span class="title"><span class="name">Proposition</span> <span class="number">3.18</span></span>

<p> The transition function: </p>



<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><msub><mi>&#x003A6;</mi> <mrow><mn>1</mn><mn>2</mn></mrow></msub><mo>&#x02254;</mo><msubsup><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mn>1</mn> <mrow><mo lspace="verythinmathspace" rspace="0em">&#x02212;</mo><mn>1</mn></mrow></msubsup><msub><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mn>2</mn></msub><mo>:</mo><msubsup><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mn>1</mn> <mrow><mo lspace="verythinmathspace" rspace="0em">&#x02212;</mo><mn>1</mn></mrow></msubsup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mrow><mn>1</mn><mn>2</mn></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msubsup><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mn>2</mn> <mrow><mo lspace="verythinmathspace" rspace="0em">&#x02212;</mo><mn>1</mn></mrow></msubsup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mrow><mn>1</mn><mn>2</mn></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>
</div>



<p> is a diffeomorphism. </p>

</div>

<p>

</p>

<div class="proof" ><span class="title">Proof</span> <a class="control" href="diffloop1.xhtml#Doc-Start" onclick="toggleProof(this); return false;">(Toggle proof)</a><div class="body">

<p>We define <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>W</mi> <mrow><mn>2</mn><mn>1</mn></mrow></msub><mo>&#x02286;</mo><msubsup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mn>2</mn> <mo>*</mo></msubsup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> as the set of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>v</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02208;</mo><msubsup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mn>2</mn> <mo>*</mo></msubsup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> with <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>,</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mn>2</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>v</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02208;</mo><msub><mi>V</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub></math>. As for <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>W</mi> <mrow><mn>1</mn><mn>2</mn></mrow></msub></math>, <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msubsup><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mn>2</mn> <mrow><mo lspace="verythinmathspace" rspace="0em">&#x02212;</mo><mn>1</mn></mrow></msubsup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo>&#x02229;</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mn>2</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msub><mi>W</mi> <mrow><mn>2</mn><mn>1</mn></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>.

</p>

<p>The idea of the proof is to set up a diffeomorphism between <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>W</mi> <mrow><mn>1</mn><mn>2</mn></mrow></msub></math> and <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>W</mi> <mrow><mn>2</mn><mn>1</mn></mrow></msub></math>. Corollary&#x000A0;<a href="diffloop4.xhtml#theorem.3.12">3.12</a> says that the resulting map on sections is a diffeomorphism. Finally, we show that this diffeomorphism is the transition function defined in the statement of this proposition.

</p>

<p>Let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x003B8;</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo>:</mo><msub><mi>W</mi> <mrow><mn>1</mn><mn>2</mn></mrow></msub><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> be the map: </p>



<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><msub><mi>&#x003B8;</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>v</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003C0;</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mn>2</mn></msub><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mrow><mo lspace="verythinmathspace" rspace="0em">&#x02212;</mo><mn>1</mn></mrow></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mn>2</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>,</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>v</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>.</mo></math>
</div>



<p> The definition of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>W</mi> <mrow><mn>1</mn><mn>2</mn></mrow></msub></math> ensures that <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mn>2</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>,</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>v</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02208;</mo><msub><mi>V</mi> <mn>2</mn></msub></math> for <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>v</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02208;</mo><msub><mi>W</mi> <mrow><mn>1</mn><mn>2</mn></mrow></msub></math> and this is the image of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003C0;</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mn>2</mn></msub></math>. Hence <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x003B8;</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub></math> is well-defined. Define <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x003B8;</mi> <mn>2</mn></msub><mo>:</mo><msub><mi>W</mi> <mrow><mn>2</mn><mn>1</mn></mrow></msub><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> similarly. These are both smooth maps.

</p>

<p>Notice that <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003C0;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003C0;</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mi>i</mi></msub><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mrow><mo lspace="verythinmathspace" rspace="0em">&#x02212;</mo><mn>1</mn></mrow></msup><mo>:</mo><msub><mi>V</mi> <mi>i</mi></msub><mo>&#x02286;</mo><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>M</mi></math> is the projection onto the first factor and <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mi>i</mi></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003C0;</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mi>i</mi></msub><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mrow><mo lspace="verythinmathspace" rspace="0em">&#x02212;</mo><mn>1</mn></mrow></msup><mo>:</mo><msub><mi>V</mi> <mi>i</mi></msub><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>M</mi></math> is the projection onto the second. Thus <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003C0;</mi><msub><mi>&#x003B8;</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>v</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mn>2</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>. Hence <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x003B8;</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo>:</mo><msub><mi>W</mi> <mrow><mn>1</mn><mn>2</mn></mrow></msub><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> is such that <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B8;</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>v</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02208;</mo><msubsup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mn>2</mn> <mo>*</mo></msubsup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> for all <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>v</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02208;</mo><msub><mi>W</mi> <mrow><mn>1</mn><mn>2</mn></mrow></msub></math>. Then: </p>
<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><mo maxsize="1.2em" minsize="1.2em">(</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>,</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mn>2</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B8;</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>v</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo maxsize="1.2em" minsize="1.2em">)</mo><mo>=</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>,</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>v</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02208;</mo><msub><mi>V</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub></math>
</div>



<p> so <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B8;</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>v</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02208;</mo><msub><mi>W</mi> <mrow><mn>2</mn><mn>1</mn></mrow></msub></math>. Hence we have a map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x03D5;</mi> <mrow><mn>1</mn><mn>2</mn></mrow></msub><mo>:</mo><msub><mi>W</mi> <mrow><mn>1</mn><mn>2</mn></mrow></msub><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msub><mi>W</mi> <mrow><mn>2</mn><mn>1</mn></mrow></msub></math> given by: </p>



<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><msub><mi>&#x03D5;</mi> <mrow><mn>1</mn><mn>2</mn></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>v</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B8;</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>v</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>.</mo></math>
</div>



<p> Similarly we have a map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x03D5;</mi> <mrow><mn>2</mn><mn>1</mn></mrow></msub><mo>:</mo><msub><mi>W</mi> <mrow><mn>2</mn><mn>1</mn></mrow></msub><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msub><mi>W</mi> <mrow><mn>1</mn><mn>2</mn></mrow></msub></math>. These are both smooth since the composition with the inclusion into <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> is smooth.

</p>

<p>Consider the composition <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x03D5;</mi> <mrow><mn>2</mn><mn>1</mn></mrow></msub><msub><mi>&#x03D5;</mi> <mrow><mn>1</mn><mn>2</mn></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>v</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>. Expanding this out yields: </p>



<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><mrow><mtable columnalign="right left right left right left right left right left" columnspacing="0em"><mtr><mtd><msub><mi>&#x03D5;</mi> <mrow><mn>2</mn><mn>1</mn></mrow></msub><msub><mi>&#x03D5;</mi> <mrow><mn>1</mn><mn>2</mn></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>v</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mtd> <mtd><mo>=</mo><msub><mi>&#x03D5;</mi> <mrow><mn>2</mn><mn>1</mn></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B8;</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>v</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mtd></mtr> <mtr><mtd></mtd> <mtd><mo>=</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B8;</mi> <mn>2</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B8;</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>v</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mtd></mtr> <mtr><mtd></mtd> <mtd><mo>=</mo><mo maxsize="1.2em" minsize="1.2em">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003C0;</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mrow><mo lspace="verythinmathspace" rspace="0em">&#x02212;</mo><mn>1</mn></mrow></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>,</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mn>2</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B8;</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>v</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo maxsize="1.2em" minsize="1.2em">)</mo></mtd></mtr> <mtr><mtd></mtd> <mtd><mo>=</mo><mo maxsize="1.2em" minsize="1.2em">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003C0;</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mrow><mo lspace="verythinmathspace" rspace="0em">&#x02212;</mo><mn>1</mn></mrow></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>,</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>v</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo maxsize="1.2em" minsize="1.2em">)</mo></mtd></mtr> <mtr><mtd></mtd> <mtd><mo>=</mo><mo maxsize="1.2em" minsize="1.2em">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003C0;</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mrow><mo lspace="verythinmathspace" rspace="0em">&#x02212;</mo><mn>1</mn></mrow></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003C0;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>v</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>,</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>v</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo maxsize="1.2em" minsize="1.2em">)</mo></mtd></mtr> <mtr><mtd></mtd> <mtd><mo>=</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>v</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>.</mo></mtd></mtr></mtable></mrow></math>
</div>



<p> The penultimate line is because <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>v</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02208;</mo><msubsup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mn>1</mn> <mo>*</mo></msubsup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> so <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003C0;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>v</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>.

</p>

<p>Hence <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x03D5;</mi> <mrow><mn>2</mn><mn>1</mn></mrow></msub></math> is the inverse of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x03D5;</mi> <mrow><mn>1</mn><mn>2</mn></mrow></msub></math> and so <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x03D5;</mi> <mrow><mn>1</mn><mn>2</mn></mrow></msub><mo>:</mo><msub><mi>W</mi> <mrow><mn>1</mn><mn>2</mn></mrow></msub><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msub><mi>W</mi> <mrow><mn>2</mn><mn>1</mn></mrow></msub></math> is a diffeomorphism. Thus the map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msubsup><mi>&#x03D5;</mi> <mrow><mn>1</mn><mn>2</mn></mrow> <mi>L</mi></msubsup></math> is a diffeomorphism from <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msubsup><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mn>1</mn> <mrow><mo lspace="verythinmathspace" rspace="0em">&#x02212;</mo><mn>1</mn></mrow></msubsup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo>&#x02229;</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mn>2</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> to <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msubsup><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mn>2</mn> <mrow><mo lspace="verythinmathspace" rspace="0em">&#x02212;</mo><mn>1</mn></mrow></msubsup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo>&#x02229;</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mn>2</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>. We just need to show that this is the transition function. It is sufficient to show that <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mn>2</mn></msub><msubsup><mi>&#x03D5;</mi> <mrow><mn>1</mn><mn>2</mn></mrow> <mi>L</mi></msubsup><mo>=</mo><msub><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mn>2</mn></msub><msub><mi>&#x003A6;</mi> <mrow><mn>1</mn><mn>2</mn></mrow></msub></math>. The right-hand side is, by definition, <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub></math>, which satisfies: </p>



<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><msub><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B3;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mover><mi>&#x003B3;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x002DC;</mo></mover><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>
</div>



<p> where <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mover><mi>&#x003B3;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x002DC;</mo></mover><mo>:</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> is such that <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B3;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mover><mi>&#x003B3;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x002DC;</mo></mover><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>. On the other side: </p>



<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><mrow><mtable columnalign="right left right left right left right left right left" columnspacing="0em"><mtr><mtd><msubsup><mi>&#x03D5;</mi> <mrow><mn>1</mn><mn>2</mn></mrow> <mi>L</mi></msubsup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B3;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mtd> <mtd><mo>=</mo><msub><mi>&#x03D5;</mi> <mrow><mn>1</mn><mn>2</mn></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B3;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mtd></mtr> <mtr><mtd></mtd> <mtd><mo>=</mo><mo maxsize="1.2em" minsize="1.2em">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B8;</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mover><mi>&#x003B3;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x002DC;</mo></mover><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo maxsize="1.2em" minsize="1.2em">)</mo></mtd></mtr> <mtr><mtd></mtd> <mtd><mo>=</mo><mo maxsize="1.2em" minsize="1.2em">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003C0;</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mn>2</mn></msub><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mrow><mo lspace="verythinmathspace" rspace="0em">&#x02212;</mo><mn>1</mn></mrow></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mn>2</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>,</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mover><mi>&#x003B3;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x002DC;</mo></mover><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo maxsize="1.2em" minsize="1.2em">)</mo><mo>,</mo></mtd></mtr> <mtr><mtd><mtext>hence:</mtext></mtd></mtr> <mtr><mtd><msub><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mn>2</mn></msub><msubsup><mi>&#x03D5;</mi> <mrow><mn>1</mn><mn>2</mn></mrow> <mi>L</mi></msubsup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B3;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mtd> <mtd><mo>=</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mn>2</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003C0;</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mn>2</mn></msub><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mrow><mo lspace="verythinmathspace" rspace="0em">&#x02212;</mo><mn>1</mn></mrow></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mn>2</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>,</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mover><mi>&#x003B3;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x002DC;</mo></mover><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mtd></mtr> <mtr><mtd></mtd> <mtd><mo>=</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mn>1</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mover><mi>&#x003B3;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x002DC;</mo></mover><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>,</mo></mtd></mtr></mtable></mrow></math>
</div>



<p> as required. Thus <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msubsup><mi>&#x03D5;</mi> <mrow><mn>1</mn><mn>2</mn></mrow> <mi>L</mi></msubsup><mo>=</mo><msub><mi>&#x003A6;</mi> <mrow><mn>1</mn><mn>2</mn></mrow></msub></math> and so the transition functions are diffeomorphisms. </p>

</div></div>

<p>

</p>

<div class="gentheorem thmsub" id="theorem.3.19"><span class="title"><span class="name">Remark</span> <span class="number">3.19</span></span>

<p>There is no <em>a priori</em> reason why we needed to assume that <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>M</mi></math> was a finite dimensional manifold. All we needed was to know what the smooth structure of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>M</mi></math> was and to know that it had a local addition. Since the loop of a local addition is again a local addition, we could iterate this construction and show that any iterated loop space is a smooth manifold. </p>

</div>

<p>

</p>


<h2 id="subsection.3.4">3.4 The Loop Space of the Tangent Space</h2>
<p>

</p>

<p>The next topic that we wish to consider is the topology of the space <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math>. It is usually defined, by analogy with the topology of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></math>, as a projective limit of the maps <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>C</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>,</mo><msup><mi>T</mi> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>k</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow></msup><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> where <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>T</mi> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>k</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow></msup><mi>M</mi></math> is recursively defined as the tangent space of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>T</mi> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>k</mi><mo>&#x02212;</mo><mn>1</mn><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow></msup><mi>M</mi></math>, and <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>T</mi> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mn>1</mn><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow></msup><mi>M</mi><mo>=</mo><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math>. We shall not define the topology this way but shall show that our definition is equivalent. To do this, we need to know how the structure of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math> relates to that of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math>. This is a useful piece of knowledge that we shall use again when we look at the tangent space of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math> so we record it in its own section here.

</p>

<p>We mentioned earlier that we wish to replace the source of the local addition by an arbitrary vector bundle, albeit one isomorphic to the tangent bundle. We can either repeat all of the above with arbitrary sources for the two local additions to see that the charts so defined lie in the same atlas, or we can simply observe that as the source must be isomorphic to the tangent bundle, we can use an isomorphism to transfer the local addition to the tangent bundle and also to define a linear diffeomorphism between the model spaces. Thus any chart defined using an arbitrary vector bundle factors through one that uses the tangent bundle and hence is in the same atlas.

</p>

<p>The first application of this is to lift the charts defined for <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math> to charts for <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math>. Let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>T</mi> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mn>2</mn><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow></msup><mi>M</mi></math> be the tangent bundle of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math>. Let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B7;</mi><mo>:</mo><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>M</mi></math> be a local addition with corresponding open neighbourhood <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>V</mi><mo>&#x02286;</mo><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>M</mi></math>. Then <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x003B7;</mi><mo>:</mo><msup><mi>T</mi> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mn>2</mn><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow></msup><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> is a local addition in this new sense but <em>not</em> in the strict sense.

</p>

<p>This is because <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x003C0;</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x003B7;</mi><mo>:</mo><msup><mi>T</mi> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mn>2</mn><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow></msup><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>T</mi><mi>V</mi></math> is a diffeomorphism and <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>T</mi><mi>V</mi></math> is an open neighbourhood in <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> of the diagonal. However while <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x003C0;</mi><mo>:</mo><msup><mi>T</mi> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mn>2</mn><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow></msup><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> is a vector bundle projection it is not the projection of a tangent bundle onto its base. Rather we have a commutative diagram of vector bundle projections: </p>



<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><mrow><mtable rowspacing="0.5ex"><mtr><mtd><msup><mi>T</mi> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mn>2</mn><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow></msup><mi>M</mi></mtd> <mtd><mover><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mrow><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x003C0;</mi></mrow></mover></mtd> <mtd><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></mtd></mtr> <mtr><mtd><mstyle scriptlevel="1"><mpadded width="0" lspace="-100%width"><mi>&#x003C0;</mi></mpadded><mo stretchy="false">&#x02193;</mo><mstyle scriptlevel="1"><mpadded width="0"><mrow></mrow></mpadded></mstyle></mstyle></mtd> <mtd></mtd> <mtd><mstyle scriptlevel="1"><mpadded width="0" lspace="-100%width"><mrow></mrow></mpadded><mo stretchy="false">&#x02193;</mo><mstyle scriptlevel="1"><mpadded width="0"><mi>&#x003C0;</mi></mpadded></mstyle></mstyle></mtd></mtr> <mtr><mtd><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></mtd> <mtd><mover><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>&#x003C0;</mi></mover></mtd> <mtd><mi>M</mi></mtd></mtr></mtable></mrow></math>
</div>



<p> where every map <em>except</em> <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x003C0;</mi></math> is the natural projection of a tangent bundle onto its base.
</p>

<p>In all of the following, we consider <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>T</mi> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mn>2</mn><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow></msup><mi>M</mi></math> as a vector bundle over <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> via the map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x003C0;</mi></math>.

</p>

<p>Using this local addition we get a chart <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x003A6;</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub><mo>:</mo><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><msup><mi>T</mi> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mn>2</mn><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow></msup><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msub><mi>V</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub></math> for any <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo>&#x02208;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math>. The first thing to observe about this chart is that <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>V</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub><mo>=</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>&#x003C0;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mrow><mo lspace="verythinmathspace" rspace="0em">&#x02212;</mo><mn>1</mn></mrow></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>&#x003C0;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>, where <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>&#x003C0;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup><mo>:</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math> is the loop of the projection and <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>U</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>&#x003C0;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi></mrow></msub></math> is the codomain of the chart at <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>&#x003C0;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi></math> defined using the local addition <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B7;</mi></math>. This is because <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>T</mi><mi>V</mi><mo>=</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003C0;</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>&#x003C0;</mi><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mrow><mo lspace="verythinmathspace" rspace="0em">&#x02212;</mo><mn>1</mn></mrow></msup><mi>V</mi></math> and so: </p>



<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><mrow><mtable columnalign="right left right left right left right left right left" columnspacing="0em"><mtr><mtd><msub><mi>V</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub></mtd> <mtd><mo>=</mo><mo stretchy="false">{</mo><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo>&#x02208;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>:</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>,</mo><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02208;</mo><mi>T</mi><mi>V</mi><mtext> all </mtext><mi>t</mi><mo>&#x02208;</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo stretchy="false">}</mo></mtd></mtr> <mtr><mtd></mtd> <mtd><mo>=</mo><mo stretchy="false">{</mo><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo>&#x02208;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>:</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003C0;</mi><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>,</mo><mi>&#x003C0;</mi><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02208;</mo><mi>V</mi><mtext> all </mtext><mi>t</mi><mo>&#x02208;</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo stretchy="false">}</mo></mtd></mtr> <mtr><mtd></mtd> <mtd><mo>=</mo><mo stretchy="false">{</mo><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo>&#x02208;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>:</mo><msup><mi>&#x003C0;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo>&#x02208;</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>&#x003C0;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">}</mo></mtd></mtr> <mtr><mtd></mtd> <mtd><mo>=</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>&#x003C0;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mrow><mo lspace="verythinmathspace" rspace="0em">&#x02212;</mo><mn>1</mn></mrow></msup><msub><mi>U</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>&#x003C0;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi></mrow></msub><mo>.</mo></mtd></mtr></mtable></mrow></math>
</div>



<p> Thus to get a cover of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math>, we start with a family of loops in <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>M</mi></math> such that the corresponding charts cover <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math> and then we pick any-old lifts of these loops to <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math>. One of the most straightforward ways to choose such a lift is as follows: let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo>:</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>T</mi><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></math> be a section. Define <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mover><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x5E;</mo></mover><mo>:</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> by <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mover><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x5E;</mo></mover><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo>=</mo><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo>&#x02218;</mo><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo>:</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>T</mi><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math>.

</p>

<div class="gentheorem thm" id="theorem.3.20"><span class="title"><span class="name">Proposition</span> <span class="number">3.20</span></span>

<p> The map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mover><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x5E;</mo></mover></math> induces a natural map on sections: <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mover><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x5E;</mo></mover><mo>:</mo><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mover><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x5E;</mo></mover><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mo>*</mo></msup><msup><mi>T</mi> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mn>2</mn><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow></msup><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>. A trivialisation of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> induces a trivialisation of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mover><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x5E;</mo></mover><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mo>*</mo></msup><msup><mi>T</mi> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mn>2</mn><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow></msup><mi>M</mi></math> such that the following diagram commutes: </p>



<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><mrow><mtable rowspacing="0.5ex"><mtr><mtd><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></mtd> <mtd><mo>&#x02192;</mo></mtd> <mtd><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mtd> <mtd><mover><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mrow><msub><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub></mrow></mover></mtd> <mtd><msub><mi>U</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub></mtd> <mtd><mo>&#x02286;</mo></mtd> <mtd><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></mtd></mtr> <mtr><mtd><mstyle scriptlevel="1"><mpadded width="0" lspace="-100%width"><mover><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x5E;</mo></mover></mpadded><mo stretchy="false">&#x02193;</mo><mstyle scriptlevel="1"><mpadded width="0"><mrow></mrow></mpadded></mstyle></mstyle></mtd> <mtd></mtd> <mtd><mstyle scriptlevel="1"><mpadded width="0" lspace="-100%width"><mover><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x5E;</mo></mover></mpadded><mo stretchy="false">&#x02193;</mo><mstyle scriptlevel="1"><mpadded width="0"><mrow></mrow></mpadded></mstyle></mstyle></mtd> <mtd></mtd> <mtd></mtd> <mtd></mtd> <mtd><mstyle scriptlevel="1"><mpadded width="0" lspace="-100%width"><mover><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x5E;</mo></mover></mpadded><mo stretchy="false">&#x02193;</mo><mstyle scriptlevel="1"><mpadded width="0"><mrow></mrow></mpadded></mstyle></mstyle></mtd></mtr> <mtr><mtd><mi>L</mi><mi>T</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></mtd> <mtd><mo>&#x02192;</mo></mtd> <mtd><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mover><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x5E;</mo></mover><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mo>*</mo></msup><msup><mi>T</mi> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mn>2</mn><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow></msup><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mtd> <mtd><mover><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mrow><msub><mi>&#x003A6;</mi> <mrow><mover><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x5E;</mo></mover><mi>&#x003B1;</mi></mrow></msub></mrow></mover></mtd> <mtd><msub><mi>V</mi> <mrow><mover><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x5E;</mo></mover><mi>&#x003B1;</mi></mrow></msub></mtd> <mtd><mo>&#x02286;</mo></mtd> <mtd><mi>L</mi><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mpadded width="0"><mo>.</mo></mpadded></mtd></mtr></mtable></mrow></math>
</div>



<p> </p>

</div>

<p>

</p>

<div class="proof" ><span class="title">Proof</span> <a class="control" href="diffloop1.xhtml#Doc-Start" onclick="toggleProof(this); return false;">(Toggle proof)</a><div class="body">

<p>We shall start by explaining the two maps induced by <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003C4;</mi></math>. The space <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> is an embedded submanifold of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math>. It can be defined as the preimage of the diagonal in <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>M</mi></math> under the map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>v</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>,</mo><mi>&#x003C0;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>v</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>. Its tangent space is therefore an embedded submanifold of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>T</mi><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msup><mi>T</mi> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mn>2</mn><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow></msup><mi>M</mi></math> and is the preimage of the diagonal in <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> under the map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x003C0;</mi></math>. Hence <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>T</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> is the pull-back of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x003C0;</mi><mo>:</mo><msup><mi>T</mi> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mn>2</mn><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow></msup><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> under <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x003B1;</mi></math>.

</p>

<p>Now a section <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B2;</mi></math> of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> is a special kind of map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo>:</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math>. It therefore differentiates to a map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo>:</mo><mi>T</mi><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>T</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mo>*</mo></msup><msup><mi>T</mi> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mn>2</mn><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow></msup><mi>M</mi></math>. As <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B2;</mi></math> is a section, <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003C0;</mi><mi>&#x003B2;</mi></math> is the identity on <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></math>, hence <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x003C0;</mi><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x003B2;</mi></math> is the identity on <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>T</mi><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></math> and so <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x003B2;</mi></math> is a section of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mo>*</mo></msup><msup><mi>T</mi> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mn>2</mn><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow></msup><mi>M</mi></math>. We compose this with <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003C4;</mi></math> to get <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo>&#x02218;</mo><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo>:</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mo>*</mo></msup><msup><mi>T</mi> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mn>2</mn><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow></msup><mi>M</mi></math>. As <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x003B2;</mi></math> is a section, <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x003C0;</mi><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo>=</mo><mi>&#x003C4;</mi></math> and so <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mi>&#x003C4;</mi></math> is a section of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>&#x003C4;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mo>*</mo></msup><msup><mi>T</mi> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mn>2</mn><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow></msup><mi>M</mi></math>. As <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>&#x003C4;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mo>*</mo></msup><mo>=</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mo>*</mo></msup></math>, <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mi>&#x003C4;</mi></math> is a section of of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mover><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x5E;</mo></mover><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mo>*</mo></msup><msup><mi>T</mi> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mn>2</mn><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow></msup><mi>M</mi></math>. Thus we have the map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mover><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x5E;</mo></mover><mo>:</mo><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mi>&#x003C4;</mi></math> from sections of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> to sections of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mover><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x5E;</mo></mover><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mo>*</mo></msup><msup><mi>T</mi> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mn>2</mn><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow></msup><mi>M</mi></math>.

</p>

<p>The other map works similarly: let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x03D5;</mi><mo>:</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> be a trivialisation. This differentiates to <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x03D5;</mi><mo>:</mo><mi>T</mi><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>T</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>T</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mo>*</mo></msup><msup><mi>T</mi> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mn>2</mn><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow></msup><mi>M</mi></math> which is a trivialisation over <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>T</mi><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></math>. This pulls-back via <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003C4;</mi></math> to a trivialisation <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>T</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msup><mi>&#x003C4;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mo>*</mo></msup><msup><mi>T</mi> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mn>2</mn><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow></msup><mi>M</mi></math>. The left-hand side of this is <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mrow><mn>2</mn><mi>n</mi></mrow></msup></math> and the right is <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mover><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x5E;</mo></mover><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mo>*</mo></msup><msup><mi>T</mi> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mn>2</mn><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow></msup><mi>M</mi></math>.

</p>
<p>To see how the commutative diagram works, we start with a loop in <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></math> and trace how it becomes a loop in <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>M</mi></math>. Let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mover><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x2c7;</mo></mover><mo>:</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></math> be the map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>t</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>, then the loop in <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>M</mi></math> is the composition: </p>



<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mover><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mover><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x2c7;</mo></mover></mover><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup><mover><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>&#x03D5;</mi></mover><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02286;</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mover><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>&#x003B7;</mi></mover><mi>M</mi><mo>.</mo></math>
</div>



<p>

</p>

<p>We differentiate this, and use the identification of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>T</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> with <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mo>*</mo></msup><msup><mi>T</mi> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mn>2</mn><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow></msup><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02286;</mo><mi>T</mi><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msup><mi>T</mi> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mn>2</mn><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow></msup><mi>M</mi></math> to get the map: </p>



<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><mi>T</mi><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mover><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mrow><mi>d</mi><mover><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x2c7;</mo></mover></mrow></mover><mi>T</mi><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>T</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup><mover><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mrow><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x03D5;</mi></mrow></mover><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02286;</mo><mi>T</mi><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msup><mi>T</mi> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mn>2</mn><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow></msup><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msup><mi>T</mi> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mn>2</mn><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow></msup><mi>M</mi><mover><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mrow><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x003B7;</mi></mrow></mover><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>.</mo></math>
</div>



<p>

</p>

<p>The first four terms in this sequence are fibre bundles over <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>T</mi><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></math> (viewing <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>T</mi><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></math> as a bundle over itself with one-point fibres) and all the maps are of fibre bundles. Therefore we can pull-back these terms over <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></math> using the section <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo>:</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>T</mi><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></math>. The map from the fourth to fifth terms is the projection of the product away from <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>T</mi><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></math> so is unchanged under the pull-back. The third term is <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mover><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x5E;</mo></mover><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mo>*</mo></msup><msup><mi>T</mi> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mn>2</mn><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow></msup><mi>M</mi></math> and the second map is the induced trivialisation of this bundle. The first map, <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>&#x003C4;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>d</mi><mover><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x2c7;</mo></mover></math>, fits into the diagram: </p>



<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><mrow><mtable rowspacing="0.5ex"><mtr><mtd><mi>T</mi><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mtd> <mtd><mover><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mrow><mi>d</mi><mover><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x2c7;</mo></mover></mrow></mover></mtd> <mtd><mi>T</mi><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>T</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></mtd></mtr> <mtr><mtd><mstyle scriptlevel="1"><mpadded width="0" lspace="-100%width"><mi>&#x003C4;</mi></mpadded><mo stretchy="false">&#x02191;</mo><mstyle scriptlevel="1"><mpadded width="0"><mrow></mrow></mpadded></mstyle></mstyle></mtd> <mtd></mtd> <mtd><mstyle scriptlevel="1"><mpadded width="0" lspace="-100%width"><mrow></mrow></mpadded><mo stretchy="false">&#x02191;</mo><mstyle scriptlevel="1"><mpadded width="0"><mrow><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mn>1</mn></mrow></mpadded></mstyle></mstyle></mtd></mtr> <mtr><mtd><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mtd> <mtd><mover><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mrow><msup><mi>&#x003C4;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>d</mi><mover><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x2c7;</mo></mover></mrow></mover></mtd> <mtd><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>T</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup><mpadded width="0"><mo>.</mo></mpadded></mtd></mtr></mtable></mrow></math>
</div>



<p> Differentiating <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mover><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x2c7;</mo></mover><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> yields <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>d</mi><mover><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x2c7;</mo></mover><mo>=</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mn>1</mn><mo>,</mo><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> and so <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>d</mi><mover><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x2c7;</mo></mover><mo>&#x02218;</mo><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo>=</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo>&#x02218;</mo><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo>,</mo><mover><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x5E;</mo></mover><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>. Hence <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>&#x003C4;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mover><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x5E;</mo></mover><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>. Thus <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>&#x003C4;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x003B2;</mi></math> is the map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>T</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></math> corresponding to the map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mover><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x5E;</mo></mover><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo>&#x02208;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>T</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></math>. Write this as <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mover><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x5E;</mo></mover><mover><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x2c7;</mo></mover></math>.

</p>

<p>We therefore have the commutative diagram: </p>



<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><mrow><mtable rowspacing="0.5ex"><mtr><mtd><mi>T</mi><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mtd> <mtd><mover><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mrow><mi>d</mi><mover><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x2c7;</mo></mover></mrow></mover></mtd> <mtd><mi>T</mi><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>T</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></mtd> <mtd><mover><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mrow><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x03D5;</mi></mrow></mover></mtd> <mtd><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mo>*</mo></msup><msup><mi>T</mi> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mn>2</mn><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow></msup><mi>M</mi></mtd> <mtd><mo>&#x02192;</mo></mtd> <mtd><msup><mi>T</mi> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mn>2</mn><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow></msup><mi>M</mi></mtd> <mtd><mover><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mrow><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x003B7;</mi></mrow></mover></mtd> <mtd><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></mtd></mtr> <mtr><mtd><mstyle scriptlevel="1"><mpadded width="0" lspace="-100%width"><mover><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x5E;</mo></mover></mpadded><mo stretchy="false">&#x02191;</mo><mstyle scriptlevel="1"><mpadded width="0"><mrow></mrow></mpadded></mstyle></mstyle></mtd> <mtd></mtd> <mtd><mstyle scriptlevel="1"><mpadded width="0" lspace="-100%width"><mover><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x5E;</mo></mover></mpadded><mo stretchy="false">&#x02191;</mo><mstyle scriptlevel="1"><mpadded width="0"><mrow></mrow></mpadded></mstyle></mstyle></mtd> <mtd></mtd> <mtd><mstyle scriptlevel="1"><mpadded width="0" lspace="-100%width"><mrow></mrow></mpadded><mo stretchy="false">&#x02191;</mo><mstyle scriptlevel="1"><mpadded width="0"><mover><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x5E;</mo></mover></mpadded></mstyle></mstyle></mtd> <mtd></mtd> <mtd><mstyle scriptlevel="1"><mpadded width="0" lspace="-100%width"><mn>1</mn></mpadded><mo stretchy="false">&#x02191;</mo><mstyle scriptlevel="1"><mpadded width="0"><mrow></mrow></mpadded></mstyle></mstyle></mtd> <mtd></mtd> <mtd><mstyle scriptlevel="1"><mpadded width="0" lspace="-100%width"><mn>1</mn></mpadded><mo stretchy="false">&#x02191;</mo><mstyle scriptlevel="1"><mpadded width="0"><mrow></mrow></mpadded></mstyle></mstyle></mtd></mtr> <mtr><mtd><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mtd> <mtd><mover><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mrow><mover><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x5E;</mo></mover><mover><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x2c7;</mo></mover></mrow></mover></mtd> <mtd><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>T</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></mtd> <mtd><mover><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mrow><msup><mi>&#x003C4;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x03D5;</mi></mrow></mover></mtd> <mtd><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mover><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x5E;</mo></mover><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mo>*</mo></msup><msup><mi>T</mi> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mn>2</mn><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow></msup><mi>M</mi></mtd> <mtd><mo>&#x02192;</mo></mtd> <mtd><msup><mi>T</mi> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mn>2</mn><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow></msup><mi>M</mi></mtd> <mtd><mover><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mrow><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x003B7;</mi></mrow></mover></mtd> <mtd><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mpadded width="0"><mo>.</mo></mpadded></mtd></mtr></mtable></mrow></math>
</div>
<p> Going first up and then all the way along results in <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>d</mi><msub><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo>=</mo><mover><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x5E;</mo></mover><msub><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>. Going up at the third stage, <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mover><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x5E;</mo></mover><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mo>*</mo></msup><msup><mi>T</mi> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mn>2</mn><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow></msup><mi>M</mi></math>, shows that this factors through the map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mover><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x5E;</mo></mover></math> on sections, whilst going all the way along and then up shows that it factors through the map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mover><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x5E;</mo></mover><mo>:</mo><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>T</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></math>. Hence the commutative diagram of the statement of this proposition is true. </p>

</div></div>

<p>

</p>


<h2 id="subsection.3.5">3.5 The Topology of the Loop Space</h2>
<p>

</p>

<p>We now turn to the topology on <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math>.

</p>

<div class="gentheorem thm" id="theorem.3.21"><span class="title"><span class="name">Definition</span> <span class="number">3.21</span></span>

<p>The topology on <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math> is the topology such that <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>W</mi><mo>&#x02286;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math> is open if and only if <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msubsup><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mrow><mo lspace="verythinmathspace" rspace="0em">&#x02212;</mo><mn>1</mn></mrow></msubsup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>W</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> is open for all <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub></math>. </p>

</div>

<p>

</p>

<p>Since the transition functions are diffeomorphisms and hence homeomorphisms, it is sufficient to check this condition using a family of charts which cover <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math>.

</p>

<p>To investigate this topology we start with the topology of the continuous loop space, <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>C</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>,</mo><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>. The topology on this is similar to the "compact-open" topology on <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>C</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>,</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>. A basis consists of the sets: </p>



<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><mi>N</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>K</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>U</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02254;</mo><mo stretchy="false">{</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo>&#x02208;</mo><mi>C</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>,</mo><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>:</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>K</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02286;</mo><mi>U</mi><mo stretchy="false">}</mo></math>
</div>



<p> where <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>K</mi></math> runs through the family of compact subsets of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></math> and <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>U</mi></math> through the open subsets of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>M</mi></math>.

</p>

<p>With this topology, the space <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>C</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>,</mo><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> has the following properties: </p>

<ol> <li id="Item.48">

<p>It is a separable metrisable space. An explicit metric is </p>



<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><msub><mi>d</mi> <mtext>cts</mtext></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02254;</mo><mi>sup</mi><mo stretchy="false">{</mo><msub><mi>d</mi> <mi>M</mi></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>,</mo><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>:</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>&#x02208;</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo stretchy="false">}</mo></math>
</div>



<p> where <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>d</mi> <mi>M</mi></msub></math> is a metric on <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>M</mi></math> compatible with its topology; for example, that which comes from a Riemannian structure.

</p>

</li><li id="Item.49">

<p>The space of smooth loops is dense. The standard proof of this is to show that any continuous loop can be approximated to an arbitrary degree by a piecewise geodesic. Any piecewise smooth loop can be approximated (in the compact-open topology) by a smooth one by "rounding off the corners". </p>

</li></ol>

<p>

</p>

<div class="gentheorem thm" id="theorem.3.22"><span class="title"><span class="name">Lemma</span> <span class="number">3.22</span></span>

<p>The natural inclusion <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>C</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>,</mo><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> is continuous and the codomains of the charts are open for the induced topology. </p>

</div>

<p>

</p>

<div class="proof" ><span class="title">Proof</span> <a class="control" href="diffloop1.xhtml#Doc-Start" onclick="toggleProof(this); return false;">(Toggle proof)</a><div class="body">

<p>We start with the statement on the codomains. Recall that the codomain of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub></math> is the set <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>U</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub></math> such that <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">{</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">}</mo><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub><mo>=</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mo stretchy="false">{</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">}</mo><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02229;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>V</mi></math>. Now a loop in <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>V</mi></math> is smooth if and only if it is smooth as a loop in <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>M</mi></math>, so as <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B1;</mi></math> is smooth the right-hand side of this is: </p>



<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><mo maxsize="1.8em" minsize="1.8em">(</mo><mo maxsize="1.2em" minsize="1.2em">(</mo><mo stretchy="false">{</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">}</mo><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>C</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>,</mo><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo maxsize="1.2em" minsize="1.2em">)</mo><mo>&#x02229;</mo><mi>C</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>,</mo><mi>V</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo maxsize="1.8em" minsize="1.8em">)</mo><mo>&#x02229;</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>.</mo></math>
</div>



<p> Hence if <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msubsup><mi>U</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mn>0</mn></msubsup><mo>&#x02286;</mo><mi>C</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>,</mo><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> is the continuous version of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>U</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub></math>, then <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>U</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub><mo>=</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02229;</mo><msubsup><mi>U</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mn>0</mn></msubsup></math>. As <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>V</mi></math> is open in <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>M</mi></math>, <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>C</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>,</mo><mi>V</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> is open in <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>C</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>,</mo><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> and so <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msubsup><mi>U</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mn>0</mn></msubsup></math> is open in <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>C</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>,</mo><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>. Hence <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>U</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub></math> is open for the induced topology on <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math>.

</p>

<p>The topology on <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math> is defined such that <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>W</mi><mo>&#x02286;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math> is open if and only if <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msubsup><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mrow><mo lspace="verythinmathspace" rspace="0em">&#x02212;</mo><mn>1</mn></mrow></msubsup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>W</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> is open for all <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B1;</mi></math>. Thus a map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>f</mi></math> from <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math> is continuous if and only if all the compositions <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>f</mi><mo>&#x02218;</mo><msub><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub></math> are continuous.

</p>

<p>A smooth trivialisation of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> identifies <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> with <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></math>. It also identifies the space of continuous sections, <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msubsup><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow> <mn>0</mn></msubsup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>, with the continuous loop space, <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>C</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>,</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>. The obvious square commutes. As with smooth sections, a section of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> is continuous if and only if the induced map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> is continuous. Therefore there is an analogous map: </p>



<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><msubsup><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mn>0</mn></msubsup><mo>:</mo><msubsup><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow> <mn>0</mn></msubsup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msubsup><mi>U</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mn>0</mn></msubsup><mo>,</mo><mspace width="2em"></mspace><msubsup><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mn>0</mn></msubsup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><mi>&#x003B7;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mover><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo>&#x002DC;</mo></mover><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>.</mo></math>
</div>



<p> In this case, we have a topology on the target already. That the map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msubsup><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mn>0</mn></msubsup></math> is continuous for this topology is a direct consequence of the fact that if <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>f</mi><mo>:</mo><mi>X</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>Y</mi></math> is continuous then the induced map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>f</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup><mo>:</mo><mi>C</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>,</mo><mi>X</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>C</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>,</mo><mi>Y</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> is continuous.

</p>

<p>Consider the following diagram: </p>



<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><mrow><mtable rowspacing="0.5ex"><mtr><mtd><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></mtd> <mtd><mover><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mo>&#x02245;</mo></mover></mtd> <mtd><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>&#x003B3;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mtd> <mtd><mover><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mrow><msub><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mi>&#x003B3;</mi></msub></mrow></mover></mtd> <mtd><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></mtd></mtr> <mtr><mtd><mstyle scriptlevel="1"><mpadded width="0" lspace="-100%width"><mrow><msub><mi>i</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>R</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></mrow></msub></mrow></mpadded><mo stretchy="false">&#x02193;</mo><mstyle scriptlevel="1"><mpadded width="0"><mrow></mrow></mpadded></mstyle></mstyle></mtd> <mtd></mtd> <mtd><mstyle scriptlevel="1"><mpadded width="0" lspace="-100%width"><mrow><msub><mi>i</mi> <mi>&#x003B3;</mi></msub></mrow></mpadded><mo stretchy="false">&#x02193;</mo><mstyle scriptlevel="1"><mpadded width="0"><mrow></mrow></mpadded></mstyle></mstyle></mtd> <mtd></mtd> <mtd><mstyle scriptlevel="1"><mpadded width="0" lspace="-100%width"><mrow></mrow></mpadded><mo stretchy="false">&#x02193;</mo><mstyle scriptlevel="1"><mpadded width="0"><mrow><msub><mi>i</mi> <mi>M</mi></msub></mrow></mpadded></mstyle></mstyle></mtd></mtr> <mtr><mtd><mi>C</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>,</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mtd> <mtd><mover><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mo>&#x02245;</mo></mover></mtd> <mtd><msubsup><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow> <mn>0</mn></msubsup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>&#x003B3;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mtd> <mtd><mover><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mrow><msubsup><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mi>&#x003B3;</mi> <mn>0</mn></msubsup></mrow></mover></mtd> <mtd><mi>C</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>,</mo><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mtd></mtr></mtable></mrow></math>
</div>



<p>

</p>

<p>The map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>i</mi> <mi>M</mi></msub></math> is continuous if and only if <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>i</mi> <mi>M</mi></msub><mo>&#x02218;</mo><msub><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mi>&#x003B3;</mi></msub></math> is continuous, for each <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B3;</mi></math>. This is the same as <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msubsup><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mi>&#x003B3;</mi> <mn>0</mn></msubsup><msub><mi>i</mi> <mi>&#x003B3;</mi></msub></math>. Then <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>i</mi> <mi>&#x003B3;</mi></msub></math> is continuous because it is equivalent to <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>i</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></mrow></msub></math> which is the inclusion of smooth loops in continuous loops in Euclidean space. </p>

</div></div>

<p>

</p>

<p>This result has some useful corollaries:

</p>

<div class="gentheorem thm" id="theorem.3.23"><span class="title"><span class="name">Corollary</span> <span class="number">3.23</span></span>

<p>With this topology, <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math> is: </p>

<ol> <li id="Item.50">

<p>Hausdorff, </p>

</li><li id="Item.51">

<p>regular, </p>

</li><li id="Item.52">

<p>second countable, and </p>

</li><li id="Item.53">

<p>paracompact. </p>

</li></ol>

<p> </p>
</div>

<p>

</p>

<div class="proof" ><span class="title">Proof</span> <a class="control" href="diffloop1.xhtml#Doc-Start" onclick="toggleProof(this); return false;">(Toggle proof)</a><div class="body">

<p></p>

<ol> <li id="Item.54">

<p>Any topology finer than a Hausdorff topology is Hausdorff. Viewing <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math> as a (topological) subspace of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>C</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>,</mo><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>, the induced topology is Hausdorff as <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>C</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>,</mo><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> is metrisable. Hence the given topology on <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math> is Hausdorff.

</p>

</li><li id="Item.55">

<p>With the compact-open topology, <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math> is a regular space. Therefore, as the codomains of charts are open for the compact-open topology, every point has a closed neighbourhood contained in the codomain of a chart.

</p>

<p>Let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>C</mi><mo>&#x02286;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math> be a closed set and <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B3;</mi><mo>&#x02209;</mo><mi>C</mi></math>. Let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>D</mi></math> be a closed neighbourhood of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B3;</mi></math> that is contained in the codomain of a chart. The chart map induces a homeomorphism between <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>D</mi></math> and a closed subset of a locally convex topological vector space, which is regular as a topological space.

</p>

<p>Therefore, there is a set <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mover><mi>B</mi><mo>&#x002DC;</mo></mover></math> which is open in <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>D</mi></math> such that <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B3;</mi><mo>&#x02208;</mo><mover><mi>B</mi><mo>&#x002DC;</mo></mover></math> and the closure of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mover><mi>B</mi><mo>&#x002DC;</mo></mover></math> does not meet <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>D</mi><mo>&#x02229;</mo><mi>C</mi></math>. Let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>B</mi></math> be the intersection of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mover><mi>B</mi><mo>&#x002DC;</mo></mover></math> with the interior of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>D</mi></math>. As <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>D</mi></math> is a neighbourhood of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B3;</mi></math>, this is still a non-empty set containing <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B3;</mi></math>. Moreover, as an open subset of the interior of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>D</mi></math>, it is open in <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math>. Its closure in <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math> is the same as its closure in <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>D</mi></math>. This does not meet <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>D</mi><mo>&#x02229;</mo><mi>C</mi></math>, whence - as it is contained within <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>D</mi></math> - it does not meet <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>C</mi></math>.

</p>

<p>Hence <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math> is regular.

</p>

</li><li id="Item.56">

<p>We start by observing that a countable number of codomains of charts will cover <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math>. This is because with the compact-open topology, i.e.&#x000A0;with <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math> viewed as a subspace of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>C</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>,</mo><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>, <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math> is second countable (as it is a subspace of a second countable space). It is therefore Lindel&#x000F6;f. Now the codomains of the charts form an open covering <em>with the compact-open topology</em>, hence a countable number of them, say the family <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">{</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mi>n</mi></msub><mo stretchy="false">}</mo></math>, will cover <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math>.

</p>

<p>Each chart codomain is homeomorphic to an open subset of the separable, metrisable space <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></math>. It therefore is itself second countable. Thus for each codomain in our countable covering we choose a countable basis for the topology. This forms a countable family of open sets which we claim is a basis for the topology.

</p>

<p>This is straightforward: for <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>W</mi><mo>&#x02286;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math> open, as the countable family of codomains covers <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math> then <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>W</mi></math> is the union of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>W</mi><mo>&#x02229;</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mi>n</mi></msub></math>. Each of these is then the union of sets in our basis. Hence <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>W</mi></math> is the union of sets in our basis. Thus <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math> has a countable basis and so is second countable.

</p>

</li><li id="Item.57">

<p>We use the following two results: </p>

<ol> <li id="Item.58">

<p>A second countable space is Lindel&#x000F6;f, and </p>

</li><li id="Item.59">

<p>A Lindel&#x000F6;f regular space is paracompact. </p>
</li></ol>

<p> </p>

</li></ol>

<p> </p>

</div></div>

<p>

</p>

<p>From this, various topological results follow including the fact that <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math> is metrisable. We shall quote from [<a href="diffloop8.xhtml#cite.akpm">KM97</a>] the result that <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math> is <em>smoothly paracompact</em> which means that it admits smooth partitions of unity subordinate to any open cover. This implies that it is <em>smoothly Hausdorff</em> in that any two points can be separated by a smooth function.

</p>

<p>We have now proved that:

</p>

<div class="gentheorem thm" id="theorem.3.24"><span class="title"><span class="name">Theorem</span> <span class="number">3.24</span></span>

<p>The space <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math> is a smooth manifold. </p>

</div>

<p>

</p>

<p>The topology on <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math> is usually given in a different way to that which we have used. The section <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo>:</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>T</mi><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></math>, <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mfrac><mo>&#x02202;</mo><mrow><mo>&#x02202;</mo><mi>t</mi></mrow></mfrac><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> defines a section <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> and thus, by iteration, <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>T</mi> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>k</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow></msup><mi>M</mi></math>. Composing this with the inclusion of smooth loops in continuous loops yields a family of maps <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>C</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>,</mo><msup><mi>T</mi> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>k</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow></msup><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>.

</p>

<div class="gentheorem thm" id="theorem.3.25"><span class="title"><span class="name">Proposition</span> <span class="number">3.25</span></span>

<p> The topology on <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math> is the projective topology for this family of maps <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>C</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>,</mo><msup><mi>T</mi> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>k</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow></msup><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>. </p>

</div>

<p>

</p>

<div class="proof" ><span class="title">Proof</span> <a class="control" href="diffloop1.xhtml#Doc-Start" onclick="toggleProof(this); return false;">(Toggle proof)</a><div class="body">

<p>We apply Proposition&#x000A0;<a href="diffloop4.xhtml#theorem.3.20">3.20</a> with the section <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mfrac><mo>&#x02202;</mo><mrow><mo>&#x02202;</mo><mi>t</mi></mrow></mfrac><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> to see that the following diagram commutes: </p>



<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><mrow><mtable rowspacing="0.5ex"><mtr><mtd><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></mtd> <mtd><mover><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mrow><msub><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub></mrow></mover></mtd> <mtd><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></mtd></mtr> <mtr><mtd><mstyle scriptlevel="1"><mpadded width="0" lspace="-100%width"><mrow><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo>&#x02032;</mo></mrow></mpadded><mo stretchy="false">&#x02193;</mo><mstyle scriptlevel="1"><mpadded width="0"><mrow></mrow></mpadded></mstyle></mstyle></mtd> <mtd></mtd> <mtd><mstyle scriptlevel="1"><mpadded width="0" lspace="-100%width"><mrow></mrow></mpadded><mo stretchy="false">&#x02193;</mo><mstyle scriptlevel="1"><mpadded width="0"><mrow><mi>&#x003B3;</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>&#x003B3;</mi><mo>&#x02032;</mo></mrow></mpadded></mstyle></mstyle></mtd></mtr> <mtr><mtd><mi>L</mi><mi>T</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></mtd> <mtd><mover><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mrow><msub><mi>&#x003A6;</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub></mrow></mover></mtd> <mtd><mi>L</mi><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></mtd></mtr> <mtr><mtd><mo stretchy="false">&#x02193;</mo></mtd> <mtd></mtd> <mtd><mo stretchy="false">&#x02193;</mo></mtd></mtr> <mtr><mtd><mi>C</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>,</mo><mi>T</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mtd> <mtd><mo>&#x02192;</mo></mtd> <mtd><mi>C</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>,</mo><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mpadded width="0"><mo>.</mo></mpadded></mtd></mtr></mtable></mrow></math>
</div>
<p> The topology on <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></math> is the projective limit of the obvious iteration of this diagram. Therefore we can construct a basis for the topology on <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math> out of sets which are the preimage of open sets in each <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>C</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>,</mo><msup><mi>T</mi> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>k</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow></msup><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>, which is precisely what is meant by the definition of the projective topology. </p>

</div></div>

<p>

</p>


<h2 id="subsection.3.6">3.6 Loopy Maps</h2>
<p>

</p>

<p>In this section we look at some maps involving loop spaces that ought to be smooth and show that indeed they are so.

</p>

<p>One corollary of the proof of Proposition&#x000A0;<a href="diffloop4.xhtml#theorem.3.25">3.25</a> is that the canonical map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> given by <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo>&#x02032;</mo></math> is continuous. Further, we can show that it is smooth:

</p>

<div class="gentheorem thm" id="theorem.3.26"><span class="title"><span class="name">Lemma</span> <span class="number">3.26</span></span>

<p>Let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo>:</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>T</mi><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></math> be a section. The map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math>, <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mover><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x5E;</mo></mover><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo>=</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>d</mi><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mi>&#x003C4;</mi></math>, is smooth. </p>

</div>

<p>

</p>

<div class="proof" ><span class="title">Proof</span> <a class="control" href="diffloop1.xhtml#Doc-Start" onclick="toggleProof(this); return false;">(Toggle proof)</a><div class="body">

<p>Let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo>&#x02208;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math>. From the proof of Proposition&#x000A0;<a href="diffloop4.xhtml#theorem.3.25">3.25</a> we have charts for <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math> and <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> with chart maps <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub></math> and <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x003A6;</mi> <mrow><mover><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x5E;</mo></mover><mi>&#x003B1;</mi></mrow></msub></math> such that the following diagram commutes: </p>



<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><mrow><mtable rowspacing="0.5ex"><mtr><mtd><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></mtd> <mtd><mover><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mrow><msub><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub></mrow></mover></mtd> <mtd><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></mtd></mtr> <mtr><mtd><mstyle scriptlevel="1"><mpadded width="0" lspace="-100%width"><mrow><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mover><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x5E;</mo></mover><mi>&#x003B2;</mi></mrow></mpadded><mo stretchy="false">&#x02193;</mo><mstyle scriptlevel="1"><mpadded width="0"><mrow></mrow></mpadded></mstyle></mstyle></mtd> <mtd></mtd> <mtd><mstyle scriptlevel="1"><mpadded width="0" lspace="-100%width"><mrow></mrow></mpadded><mo stretchy="false">&#x02193;</mo><mstyle scriptlevel="1"><mpadded width="0"><mrow><mi>&#x003B3;</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mover><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x5E;</mo></mover><mi>&#x003B3;</mi></mrow></mpadded></mstyle></mstyle></mtd></mtr> <mtr><mtd><mi>L</mi><mi>T</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></mtd> <mtd><mover><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mrow><msub><mi>&#x003A6;</mi> <mrow><mover><mi>&#x003C4;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x5E;</mo></mover><mi>&#x003B1;</mi></mrow></msub></mrow></mover></mtd> <mtd><mi>L</mi><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mpadded width="0"><mo>.</mo></mpadded></mtd></mtr></mtable></mrow></math>
</div>



<p> Hence if we can show that the statement of the lemma is true for <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>M</mi><mo>=</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></math> we can deduce that it holds for all <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>M</mi></math>. However, this is obvious as it is a linear bounded map. </p>

</div></div>

<p>

</p>

<p>There is another class of maps that it will be useful to know are smooth:

</p>

<div class="gentheorem thm" id="theorem.3.27"><span class="title"><span class="name">Proposition</span> <span class="number">3.27</span></span>
<p> Let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>f</mi><mo>:</mo><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>N</mi></math> be a smooth map between smooth finite dimensional manifolds then <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>f</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup><mo>:</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>N</mi></math> is smooth. </p>

</div>

<p>

</p>

<div class="proof" ><span class="title">Proof</span> <a class="control" href="diffloop1.xhtml#Doc-Start" onclick="toggleProof(this); return false;">(Toggle proof)</a><div class="body">

<p>This is essentially the same argument as when we showed that the transition functions were smooth. We need to show that the loop of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>f</mi></math> is smooth in charts. Let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mi>M</mi></msub><mo>:</mo><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>M</mi></math> and <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mi>N</mi></msub><mo>:</mo><mi>T</mi><mi>N</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>N</mi></math> be local additions with neighbourhoods <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>V</mi> <mi>M</mi></msub></math> and <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>V</mi> <mi>N</mi></msub></math> of the respective diagonals. Let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo>&#x02208;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math>. We therefore have charts <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mi>M</mi></msub><mo>:</mo><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mi>M</mi></msub></math> and <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mi>N</mi></msub><mo>:</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>f</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>N</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mi>N</mi></msub></math> at <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B1;</mi></math> and <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>f</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> respectively.

</p>

<p>Let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>W</mi><mo>&#x02286;</mo><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> be the set: </p>



<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><mo stretchy="false">{</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>v</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02208;</mo><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>:</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>f</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>,</mo><mi>f</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mi>M</mi></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>v</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02208;</mo><msub><mi>V</mi> <mi>N</mi></msub><mo stretchy="false">}</mo><mo>.</mo></math>
</div>



<p> We claim that <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo>&#x02208;</mo><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> takes values in <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>W</mi></math> if and only if <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>f</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msub><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mi>M</mi></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02208;</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mi>N</mi></msub></math>. Let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mover><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x002DC;</mo></mover><mo>&#x02208;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> be such that the section <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>t</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mover><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x002DC;</mo></mover><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> is <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B2;</mi></math>. Then <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mi>M</mi></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><msubsup><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mi>M</mi> <mi>L</mi></msubsup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mover><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x002DC;</mo></mover><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>. By the definition of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>U</mi> <mi>N</mi></msub></math>, <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>f</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msub><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mi>M</mi></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02208;</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mi>N</mi></msub></math> if and only if <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>f</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>,</mo><mi>f</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msub><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mi>M</mi></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02208;</mo><msub><mi>V</mi> <mi>N</mi></msub></math> for all <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>t</mi></math>. As <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>f</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><mi>f</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> and <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>f</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msub><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mi>M</mi></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><mi>f</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mi>M</mi></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mover><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x002DC;</mo></mover><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>, this is equivalent to <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mover><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x002DC;</mo></mover><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02208;</mo><mi>W</mi></math> for all <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>t</mi></math>, i.e.&#x000A0;that <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B2;</mi></math> takes values in <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>W</mi></math>.

</p>

<p>As for the transition functions, let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B8;</mi><mo>:</mo><mi>W</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>T</mi><mi>N</mi></math> be the smooth function: </p>



<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><mi>&#x003B8;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>v</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msub><mi>&#x003C0;</mi> <mi>N</mi></msub><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mi>N</mi></msub><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mrow><mo lspace="verythinmathspace" rspace="0em">&#x02212;</mo><mn>1</mn></mrow></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>f</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>,</mo><mi>f</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mi>M</mi></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>v</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>.</mo></math>
</div>



<p> Exactly as for the transition functions, <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x003C0;</mi> <mi>N</mi></msub><mi>&#x003B8;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>v</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><mi>f</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> and so the map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>v</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>&#x003B8;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>v</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> is a smooth map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>W</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>f</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>N</mi></math> (smooth as it is smooth into <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>T</mi><mi>N</mi></math>).

</p>

<p>Hence we have a smooth map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x00398;</mi></math> from sections that take values in <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>W</mi></math> into <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>f</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>N</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>. It remains to show that this is the map induced by <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>f</mi></math>; that is, <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>f</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup><msub><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mi>M</mi></msub><mo>=</mo><msub><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mi>N</mi></msub><mi>&#x00398;</mi></math>. This is straightforward. Let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo>&#x02208;</mo><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> take values in <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>W</mi></math> and let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mover><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x002DC;</mo></mover></math> be the related loop in <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math>. Then: </p>



<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>f</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup><msub><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mi>M</mi></msub><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><mi>f</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mi>M</mi></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mover><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x002DC;</mo></mover><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>
</div>



<p> whilst: </p>
<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msub><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mi>N</mi></msub><mi>&#x00398;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mi>N</mi></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msub><mi>&#x003C0;</mi> <mi>N</mi></msub><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mi>N</mi></msub><msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> <mrow><mo lspace="verythinmathspace" rspace="0em">&#x02212;</mo><mn>1</mn></mrow></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>f</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>,</mo><mi>f</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mi>M</mi></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mover><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x002DC;</mo></mover><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><mi>f</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mi>M</mi></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mover><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x002DC;</mo></mover><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>.</mo></math>
</div>



<p> Hence <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x00398;</mi></math> is the map on charts corresponding to <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>f</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup></math>. Thus <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>f</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup><mo>:</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>N</mi></math> is smooth. </p>

</div></div>

<p>

</p>

<p>The other result about maps that we wish to prove is a variant of the exponential law:

</p>

<div class="gentheorem thm" id="theorem.3.28"><span class="title"><span class="name">Theorem</span> <span class="number">3.28</span></span>

<p> Let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>M</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>N</mi></math> be smooth manifolds with <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>M</mi></math> finite dimensional. Let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>f</mi><mo>:</mo><mi>N</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math> be a map and let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>f</mi> <mo>&#x02228;</mo></msup><mo>:</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>N</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>M</mi></math> be the adjoint: <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>f</mi> <mo>&#x02228;</mo></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>x</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><mi>f</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>x</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>. Then <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>f</mi></math> is smooth if and only if <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>f</mi> <mo>&#x02228;</mo></msup></math> is smooth. That is, the assignment <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>f</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msup><mi>f</mi> <mo>&#x02228;</mo></msup></math> is an identification: </p>



<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><msup><mi>C</mi> <mn>&#x0221E;</mn></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>N</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02245;</mo><msup><mi>C</mi> <mn>&#x0221E;</mn></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>N</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>.</mo></math>
</div>



<p> </p>

</div>

<p>

</p>

<p>As stated, this is a corollary of [<a href="diffloop8.xhtml#cite.akpm">KM97</a>, Theorem 42.14] with their <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x02133;</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>M</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>&#x1D4A9;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> corresponding to our <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>N</mi><mo>,</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>,</mo><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>. We give a self-contained proof here.

</p>

<div class="proof" ><span class="title">Proof</span> <a class="control" href="diffloop1.xhtml#Doc-Start" onclick="toggleProof(this); return false;">(Toggle proof)</a><div class="body">

<p>We start with the linear case: <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>M</mi><mo>=</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></math> and <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>N</mi></math> is an open subset of a convenient vector space. Thus we have <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>f</mi><mo>:</mo><mi>N</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></math> and <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>f</mi> <mo>&#x02228;</mo></msup><mo>:</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>N</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></math>.

</p>

<p>Let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003C0;</mi><mo>:</mo><mi>&#x0211D;</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></math> be the standard covering map. Now <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>N</mi></math> is a smooth manifold modelled on <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x0211D;</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>N</mi></math> using the usual charts for <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></math> so <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003C0;</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mn>1</mn><mo>:</mo><mi>&#x0211D;</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>N</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>N</mi></math> is a local diffeomorphism. Hence <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>f</mi> <mo>&#x02228;</mo></msup></math> is smooth if and only if <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>f</mi> <mo>&#x02228;</mo></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003C0;</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mn>1</mn><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> is smooth.

</p>

<p>On the other side, pre-composition with <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003C0;</mi></math> defines a linear embedding of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></math> onto a closed subspace of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>C</mi> <mn>&#x0221E;</mn></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x0211D;</mi><mo>,</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> as in the proof of Proposition&#x000A0;<a href="diffloop4.xhtml#theorem.3.7">3.7</a>. Therefore <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>f</mi></math> is smooth if and only if the map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>x</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>f</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>x</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02218;</mo><mi>&#x003C0;</mi></math> is smooth.
</p>

<p>The adjoint of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>x</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>f</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>x</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02218;</mo><mi>&#x003C0;</mi></math> is the map: </p>



<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>x</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>f</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>x</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02218;</mo><mi>&#x003C0;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><mi>f</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>x</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003C0;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><msup><mi>f</mi> <mo>&#x02228;</mo></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003C0;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>,</mo><mi>x</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><msup><mi>f</mi> <mo>&#x02228;</mo></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003C0;</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mn>1</mn><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>x</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>.</mo></math>
</div>



<p> Thus by the original exponential law, Theorem&#x000A0;<a href="diffloop4.xhtml#theorem.3.4">3.4</a>, the map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>x</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>f</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>x</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02218;</mo><mi>&#x003C0;</mi></math> is smooth if and only if <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>f</mi> <mo>&#x02228;</mo></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003C0;</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mn>1</mn><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> is smooth. Hence <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>f</mi></math> is smooth if and only if <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>f</mi> <mo>&#x02228;</mo></msup></math> is smooth.

</p>

<p>In the general case, we use charts to move into the linear one. However, with things as they stand we find that we are only partially successful: we may assume that <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>N</mi></math> is an open subset of a convenient vector space and that the codomain of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>f</mi></math> is contained in the codomain of a chart but it may not be possible to assume that the image of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>f</mi> <mo>&#x02228;</mo></msup><mo>:</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>N</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>M</mi></math> is contained in the codomain of a chart. The easiest way around this is to enhance <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>f</mi> <mo>&#x02228;</mo></msup></math> to the map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>f</mi> <mo>&#x02227;</mo></msup><mo>:</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>N</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>M</mi></math>, <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>x</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><msup><mi>f</mi> <mo>&#x02228;</mo></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>x</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>. This is smooth if and only if <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>f</mi> <mo>&#x02228;</mo></msup></math> is smooth.

</p>

<p>Let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub><mo>:</mo><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub></math> be a chart for <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math> defined using a local addition, <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B7;</mi></math>, on <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>M</mi></math> with neighbourhood <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>V</mi></math> of the diagonal in <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>M</mi></math>. Let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>V</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub><mo>&#x02286;</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>M</mi></math> be the open set <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">{</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>x</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>:</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>,</mo><mi>x</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02208;</mo><mi>V</mi><mo stretchy="false">}</mo></math>. We claim that the evaluation <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>M</mi></math> maps into <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>V</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub></math> and moreover that there is a commutative diagram: </p>



<div class="displaymaths"><a id="equation.3.1"></a><span class="eqnnumber">3.1</span>
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><mrow><mtable rowspacing="0.5ex"><mtr><mtd><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mtd> <mtd><mover><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mrow><mn>1</mn><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msub><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub></mrow></mover></mtd> <mtd><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub></mtd></mtr> <mtr><mtd><mo stretchy="false">&#x02193;</mo></mtd> <mtd></mtd> <mtd><mo stretchy="false">&#x02193;</mo></mtd></mtr> <mtr><mtd><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></mtd> <mtd><mover><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mrow><msub><mi>&#x003C8;</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub></mrow></mover></mtd> <mtd><msub><mi>V</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub></mtd></mtr></mtable></mrow></math>
</div>



<p> where both vertical maps are evaluations and both horizontal maps are diffeomorphisms. The map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x003C8;</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub></math> is defined as follows: there is a map </p>



<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02286;</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mover><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mrow><mn>1</mn><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>&#x003B7;</mi></mrow></mover><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>M</mi></math>
</div>



<p> which, we claim, has image <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>V</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub></math> and is a diffeomorphism onto that image. To see this, consider the diagram: </p>



<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><mrow><mtable rowspacing="0.5ex"><mtr><mtd><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></mtd> <mtd><mover><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mrow><mn>1</mn><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>&#x003C0;</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>&#x003B7;</mi></mrow></mover></mtd> <mtd><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>V</mi></mtd> <mtd><mover><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mo>&#x02286;</mo></mover></mtd> <mtd><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>M</mi></mtd></mtr> <mtr><mtd><mo stretchy="false">&#x02191;</mo></mtd> <mtd></mtd> <mtd><mo stretchy="false">&#x02191;</mo></mtd> <mtd></mtd> <mtd><mo stretchy="false">&#x02191;</mo></mtd></mtr> <mtr><mtd><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></mtd> <mtd></mtd> <mtd><msub><mi>V</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub></mtd> <mtd><mover><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mo>&#x02286;</mo></mover></mtd> <mtd><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>M</mi><mpadded width="0"><mo>,</mo></mpadded></mtd></mtr></mtable></mrow></math>
</div>



<p> where the right-hand vertical map is <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>x</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>&#x003B1;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>,</mo><mi>x</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>. Each vertical map is an embedding and the first upper horizontal map is a diffeomorphism. It is clear that <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> corresponds to <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>V</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub></math> on the upper level and hence the map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msub><mi>V</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub></math> is a diffeomorphism.
</p>

<p>To see that Diagram&#x000A0;<a href="diffloop4.xhtml#equation.3.1">3.1</a> commutes, let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo>&#x02208;</mo><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> and <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mover><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x002DC;</mo></mover><mo>&#x02208;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> be related as usual, so <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><mi>&#x003B7;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mover><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x002DC;</mo></mover><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>. Thus <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><mi>&#x003B7;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mover><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x002DC;</mo></mover><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><mi>&#x003B7;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mover><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x002DC;</mo></mover><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> and so going along and then down is the map: </p>



<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>&#x003B7;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mover><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x002DC;</mo></mover><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>.</mo></math>
</div>



<p> Going down and then along, we get: </p>



<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mn>1</mn><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>&#x003B7;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mn>1</mn><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>&#x003B7;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mover><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x002DC;</mo></mover><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>&#x003B7;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mover><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x002DC;</mo></mover><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>.</mo></math>
</div>



<p>

</p>

<p>Now <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>f</mi> <mo>&#x02227;</mo></msup></math> is the composition of: </p>



<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>N</mi><mover><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mrow><mn>1</mn><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>f</mi></mrow></mover><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msub><mi>V</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub><mo>&#x02286;</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>M</mi></math>
</div>



<p> where the map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msub><mi>V</mi> <mi>&#x003B1;</mi></msub></math> is the map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>&#x003B3;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>&#x003B3;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>. Thus the pair <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>f</mi><mo>,</mo><msup><mi>f</mi> <mo>&#x02227;</mo></msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> defines a pair <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>g</mi><mo>,</mo><msup><mi>g</mi> <mo>&#x02227;</mo></msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> with <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>g</mi><mo>:</mo><mi>N</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> and <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>g</mi> <mo>&#x02227;</mo></msup><mo>:</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>N</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> such that <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>g</mi></math> is smooth if and only if <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>f</mi></math> is smooth and <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>g</mi> <mo>&#x02227;</mo></msup></math> smooth if and only if <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>f</mi> <mo>&#x02227;</mo></msup></math> is smooth.

</p>

<p>A smooth trivialisation of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>&#x003B1;</mi> <mo>*</mo></msup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> identifies that space with <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></math> and sections with <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></math>. Thus we can regard <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>g</mi></math> and <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>g</mi> <mo>&#x02227;</mo></msup></math> as maps into <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></math> and <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></math> respectively. Moreover, <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>g</mi> <mo>&#x02227;</mo></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>x</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><msup><mi>g</mi> <mo>&#x02228;</mo></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>x</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> so <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>g</mi> <mo>&#x02227;</mo></msup></math> is smooth if and only if <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>g</mi> <mo>&#x02228;</mo></msup><mo>:</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>N</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></math> is smooth.

</p>

<p>We are thus in the linear case and so <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>g</mi></math> is smooth if and only if <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>g</mi> <mo>&#x02228;</mo></msup></math> is smooth. Hence <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>f</mi></math> is smooth if and only if <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>f</mi> <mo>&#x02228;</mo></msup></math> is smooth. </p>

</div></div>

<p>

</p>

<div class="gentheorem thm" id="theorem.3.29"><span class="title"><span class="name">Corollary</span> <span class="number">3.29</span></span>
<p>Let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>e</mi><mo>:</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>M</mi></math> be the evaluation map: <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>e</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>&#x003B3;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><mi>&#x003B3;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>. Let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B9;</mi><mo>:</mo><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math> be the inclusion of constant loops: <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B9;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>x</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>x</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>. Both <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>e</mi></math> and <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B9;</mi></math> are smooth. </p>

</div>

<p>

</p>

<div class="proof" ><span class="title">Proof</span> <a class="control" href="diffloop1.xhtml#Doc-Start" onclick="toggleProof(this); return false;">(Toggle proof)</a><div class="body">

<p>The map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>e</mi></math> is adjoint to the identity <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math>, hence is smooth, whereas <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B9;</mi></math> adjoints to the projection map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>M</mi></math>, hence is smooth. </p>

</div></div>

<p>

</p>

<p>For the second of those maps we can actually prove a stronger result:

</p>

<div class="gentheorem thm" id="theorem.3.30"><span class="title"><span class="name">Proposition</span> <span class="number">3.30</span></span>

<p> The map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B9;</mi><mo>:</mo><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math> is an embedding. </p>

</div>

<p>

</p>

<div class="proof" ><span class="title">Proof</span> <a class="control" href="diffloop1.xhtml#Doc-Start" onclick="toggleProof(this); return false;">(Toggle proof)</a><div class="body">

<p>Let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B7;</mi><mo>:</mo><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>M</mi></math> be a local addition on <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>M</mi></math> with <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>V</mi><mo>&#x02286;</mo><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>M</mi></math> the corresponding neighbourhood of the diagonal. For <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>x</mi><mo>&#x02208;</mo><mi>M</mi></math> let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mi>x</mi></msub><mo>:</mo><msub><mi>T</mi> <mi>x</mi></msub><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msub><mi>V</mi> <mi>x</mi></msub><mo>&#x02286;</mo><mi>M</mi></math> be the restriction of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B7;</mi></math> to <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>T</mi> <mi>x</mi></msub><mi>M</mi></math>, where <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>V</mi> <mi>x</mi></msub><mo>=</mo><mi>&#x003B7;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msub><mi>T</mi> <mi>x</mi></msub><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> is such that <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">{</mo><mi>x</mi><mo stretchy="false">}</mo><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msub><mi>V</mi> <mi>x</mi></msub><mo>=</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mo stretchy="false">{</mo><mi>x</mi><mo stretchy="false">}</mo><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02229;</mo><mi>V</mi></math>. It is a simple result from finite dimensional differential topology that this family defines an atlas for <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>M</mi></math>.

</p>

<p>Let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mi>x</mi></msub><mo>:</mo><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msubsup><mi>&#x003B3;</mi> <mi>x</mi> <mo>*</mo></msubsup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mi>x</mi></msub></math> be the chart for <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math> at the constant loop <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x003B3;</mi> <mi>x</mi></msub></math>. As <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x003B3;</mi> <mi>x</mi></msub></math> is a constant loop, <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msubsup><mi>&#x003B3;</mi> <mi>x</mi> <mo>*</mo></msubsup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>=</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msub><mi>T</mi> <mi>x</mi></msub><mi>M</mi></math>. Define <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>T</mi> <mi>x</mi></msub><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msubsup><mi>&#x003B3;</mi> <mi>x</mi> <mo>*</mo></msubsup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> by <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>v</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B2;</mi> <mi>v</mi></msub></math> where <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x003B2;</mi> <mi>v</mi></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>t</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>v</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>. This is smooth since it is linear and bounded.

</p>

<p>Now <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">{</mo><mi>x</mi><mo stretchy="false">}</mo><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msub><mi>V</mi> <mi>x</mi></msub><mo>=</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mo stretchy="false">{</mo><mi>x</mi><mo stretchy="false">}</mo><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02229;</mo><mi>V</mi></math> and <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">{</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B3;</mi> <mi>x</mi></msub><mo stretchy="false">}</mo><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mi>x</mi></msub><mo>=</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mo stretchy="false">{</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B3;</mi> <mi>x</mi></msub><mo stretchy="false">}</mo><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02229;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>V</mi></math>. Under the inclusion <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math> and <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>V</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>V</mi></math> we thus have <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>V</mi> <mi>x</mi></msub><mo>=</mo><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02229;</mo><msub><mi>U</mi> <mi>x</mi></msub></math>. We claim that the following diagram commutes: </p>



<div class="displaymaths">
<math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='block'><mrow><mtable rowspacing="0.5ex"><mtr><mtd><msub><mi>T</mi> <mi>x</mi></msub><mi>M</mi></mtd> <mtd><mover><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mrow><msub><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mi>x</mi></msub></mrow></mover></mtd> <mtd><msub><mi>V</mi> <mi>x</mi></msub></mtd></mtr> <mtr><mtd><mo stretchy="false">&#x02193;</mo></mtd> <mtd></mtd> <mtd><mo stretchy="false">&#x02193;</mo></mtd></mtr> <mtr><mtd><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msubsup><mi>&#x003B3;</mi> <mi>x</mi> <mo>*</mo></msubsup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mtd> <mtd><mover><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mrow><msub><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mi>x</mi></msub></mrow></mover></mtd> <mtd><msub><mi>U</mi> <mi>x</mi></msub><mpadded width="0"><mo>.</mo></mpadded></mtd></mtr></mtable></mrow></math>
</div>



<p> To see this, let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo>&#x02208;</mo><msub><mi>&#x00393;</mi> <mrow><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></mrow></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msubsup><mi>&#x003B3;</mi> <mi>x</mi> <mo>*</mo></msubsup><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> and <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mover><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x002DC;</mo></mover><mo>&#x02208;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>T</mi><mi>M</mi></math> be related as usual. Thus <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mover><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x002DC;</mo></mover></math> satisfies <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003C0;</mi><mover><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x002DC;</mo></mover><mo>=</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B3;</mi> <mi>x</mi></msub></math> and so <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mover><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x002DC;</mo></mover><mo>&#x02208;</mo><mi>L</mi><msub><mi>T</mi> <mi>x</mi></msub><mi>M</mi></math>. By definition, <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mi>x</mi></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><mi>&#x003B7;</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mover><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x002DC;</mo></mover><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mi>x</mi></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mover><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x002DC;</mo></mover><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>. Now <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mover><mi>&#x003B2;</mi><mo stretchy="false">&#x002DC;</mo></mover> <mi>v</mi></msub></math> is the constant map at <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>v</mi><mo>&#x02208;</mo><msub><mi>T</mi> <mi>x</mi></msub><mi>M</mi></math> and so <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x003A8;</mi> <mi>x</mi></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msub><mi>&#x003B2;</mi> <mi>v</mi></msub><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> is the constant map at <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msub><mi>&#x003B7;</mi> <mi>x</mi></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>v</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>. Hence the above diagram commutes.

</p>

<p>Thus these charts satisfy the requirements for exhibiting <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>M</mi></math> as a submanifold of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi></math>. </p>
</div></div>

<p>

</p>


<h2 id="subsection.3.7">3.7 Vector Space Idol</h2>
<p>

</p>

<p>In proving the topological results about the space of smooth loops we used the fact that the chart maps extend naturally to continuous loops. In fact, the chart maps can be used to construct a manifold structure on the spaces of many different types of loop. The key ingredients are: </p>

<ol> <li id="Item.60">

<p>The type of loop is at least continuous (with topology at least as fine as the compact-open topology) and at most smooth, and

</p>

</li><li id="Item.61">

<p>The smooth structure is diffeomorphism-invariant. That is to say, for <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>V</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>W</mi><mo>&#x02286;</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><msup><mi>&#x0211D;</mi> <mi>n</mi></msup></math> open subsets and <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003C8;</mi><mo>:</mo><mi>V</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>W</mi></math> a diffeomorphism, the induced map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>&#x003C8;</mi> <mi>L</mi></msup></math> on the appropriate type of sections is a diffeomorphism. </p>

</li></ol>

<p>

</p>

<p>With these two properties, we can adapt the work of Section&#x000A0;<a href="diffloop4.xhtml#subsection.3.3">3.3</a> to this new type of loop. To keep the alterations as straightforward as possible, we still anchor our charts at genuinely smooth loops: the first condition above ensures that these charts still cover the loop space. If we allowed other anchors, we would have to expand the second condition above to homeomorphisms that are fibrewise diffeomorphisms and satisfy some sort of condition amongst the fibres.

</p>

<p>Where we may run into trouble is with the topological properties of the new loop space. In particular, we need the model space to be second countable to prove that the loop space is second countable. If this fails, paracompactness is also thrown into doubt. The space will always be Hausdorff and regular, though.

</p>

<p>Thus, for example, the space of continuous loops is a smooth manifold, as is the space of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>H</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></math>-Sobolev loops. However, this technique is not going to define the space of <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>L</mi> <mn>2</mn></msup></math>-loops.

</p>


</body></html>