<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> <html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" ><head>

<title>The Differential Topology of Loop Spaces </title>

<meta name="Author" content="Andrew Stacey"/><link href="diffloop.css" media="all" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><script src="diffloop.js" type="text/javascript"/></head><body><p><math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline' class='dummy'><mi></mi></math></p><h2>References</h2>
<p></p>

<ol class="bibliography">

<li class="listlabel">

<p><span class="listlabel"><a id="cite.jb3"></a>[Bom67]</span>Jan Boman. Differentiability of a function and of its compositions with functions of one variable. <em>Math. Scand.</em>, 20:249-268, 1967.

</p>

</li><li class="listlabel">

<p><span class="listlabel"><a id="cite.rcvg"></a>[CG04]</span>Ralph&#x000A0;L. Cohen and V&#x000E9;ronique Godin. A polarized view of string topology. In <em>Topology, geometry and quantum field theory</em>, volume 308 of <em>London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser.</em>, pages 127-154. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 2004.

</p>

</li><li class="listlabel">

<p><span class="listlabel"><a id="cite.rcjj"></a>[CJ02]</span>Ralph&#x000A0;L. Cohen and John D.&#x000A0;S. Jones. A homotopy theoretic realization of string topology. <em>Math. Ann.</em>, 324(4):773-798, 2002.

</p>

</li><li class="listlabel">

<p><span class="listlabel"><a id="cite.rcas"></a>[CS04]</span>Ralph&#x000A0;L. Cohen and Andrew Stacey. Fourier decompositions of loop bundles. In <em>Homotopy theory: relations with algebraic geometry, group cohomology, and algebraic <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>K</mi></math>-theory</em>, volume 346 of <em>Contemp. Math.</em>, pages 85-95. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2004.

</p>

</li><li class="listlabel">

<p><span class="listlabel"><a id="cite.math.AT0312155"></a>[FHT]</span>Daniel&#x000A0;S. Freed, Michael&#x000A0;J. Hopkins, and Constantin Teleman. Twisted K-theory and Loop Group Representations, arXiv:math.AT/0312155.

</p>

</li><li class="listlabel">

<p><span class="listlabel"><a id="cite.jj"></a>[Jon87]</span>John D.&#x000A0;S. Jones. Cyclic homology and equivariant homology. <em>Invent. Math.</em>, 87(2):403-423, 1987.

</p>

</li><li class="listlabel">

<p><span class="listlabel"><a id="cite.akpm"></a>[KM97]</span>Andreas Kriegl and Peter&#x000A0;W. Michor. <em>The convenient setting of global analysis</em>, volume&#x000A0;53 of <em>Mathematical Surveys and Monographs</em>. American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 1997.

</p>

</li><li class="listlabel">

<p><span class="listlabel"><a id="cite.hlmm"></a>[LM89]</span>H.&#x000A0;Blaine Lawson, Jr. and Marie-Louise Michelsohn. <em>Spin geometry</em>, volume&#x000A0;38 of <em>Princeton Mathematical Series</em>. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1989.

</p>
</li><li class="listlabel">

<p><span class="listlabel"><a id="cite.rppr"></a>[PR94]</span>R.&#x000A0;J. Plymen and P.&#x000A0;L. Robinson. <em>Spinors in Hilbert space</em>, volume 114 of <em>Cambridge Tracts in Mathematics</em>. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1994.

</p>

</li><li class="listlabel">

<p><span class="listlabel"><a id="cite.apgs"></a>[PS86]</span>Andrew Pressley and Graeme Segal. <em>Loop groups</em>. Oxford Mathematical Monographs. The Clarendon Press Oxford University Press, New York, 1986. Oxford Science Publications.

</p>

</li><li class="listlabel">

<p><span class="listlabel"><a id="cite.math.DG0505077"></a>[Sta]</span>Andrew Stacey. The Geometry of the Loop Space and a Construction of a Dirac Operator, arXiv:math.DG/0505077.

</p>

</li><li class="listlabel">

<p><span class="listlabel"><a id="cite.as2"></a>[Sta05a]</span>Andrew Stacey. Finite dimensional subbundles of loop bundles. <em>Pacific J. Math.</em>, 219(1):187-199, 2005.

</p>

</li><li class="listlabel">

<p><span class="listlabel"><a id="cite.as3"></a>[Sta05b]</span>Andrew Stacey. The truncated Witten genus. <em>Math. Z.</em>, 249(3):581-595, 2005.

</p>

</li></ol>

<p>

</p>

</body></html>