<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> <html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" ><head>

<title>The Differential Topology of Loop Spaces </title>

<meta name="Author" content="Andrew Stacey"/><link href="diffloop.css" media="all" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><script src="diffloop.js" type="text/javascript"/></head><body><p><math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline' class='dummy'><mi></mi></math></p><h2 id="section.1">1 Introduction</h2>
<p>

</p>

<p>This document started out as an accompaniment to a series of seminars given at NTNU, and subsequently at Sheffield University, entitled: "The Differential Topology of the Loop Space". The purpose of those seminars was to present an introduction to this topic leading up to the work contained in my preprint on the construction of a Dirac operator on loop spaces, [<a href="diffloop8.xhtml#cite.math.DG0505077">Sta</a>]. This was intended to be accessible to anyone with knowledge of basic finite dimensional differential topology. Thus there was a reasonable amount of background material to be explained before the subject of Dirac operators was broached. The overall outline of this background material was divided as follows: </p>

<ol> <li id="Item.26">

<p>The differential topology of loop spaces.

</p>

</li><li id="Item.27">

<p>Spinors in arbitrary dimension.

</p>

</li><li id="Item.28">

<p>The Dirac operator and the Atiyah-Singer index theorem in finite dimensions. </p>

</li></ol>

<p>

</p>

<p>The latter two topics are already superbly covered by books accessible to any differential topologist, perhaps with a little functional analysis. The book&#x000A0;[<a href="diffloop8.xhtml#cite.hlmm">LM89</a>] is an excellent introduction to both topics in finite dimensions whilst&#x000A0;[<a href="diffloop8.xhtml#cite.rppr">PR94</a>] deals with spinors in arbitrary dimension. A group-centric viewpoint is presented in&#x000A0;[<a href="diffloop8.xhtml#cite.apgs">PS86</a>], which is required reading for anyone seriously thinking about loop spaces.

</p>

<p>The main reference for the first topic is&#x000A0;[<a href="diffloop8.xhtml#cite.akpm">KM97</a>]. Whilst several of the standard texts on differential topology and geometry deal with infinite dimensional manifolds, they only do so rigorously with manifolds modelled on Banach spaces, which for loop spaces usually means either continuous or <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>H</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup></math>-Sobolev loops. Often smooth and piece-wise smooth loops are used as a source of "useful" loops within these manifolds, but the space of smooth loops is not given an actual manifold structure. This is due to the technical difficulties in extending calculus outside the realm of Banach spaces.

</p>

<p>The purpose of&#x000A0;[<a href="diffloop8.xhtml#cite.akpm">KM97</a>] is to deal with precisely this issue and to set up a theory of analysis in infinite dimensions in arbitrary topological vector spaces. It goes on to develop the theory of infinite dimensional manifolds in its broadest setting which includes smooth loop spaces. However, this means that whilst being an excellent book, its subject matter is perhaps too broad and too deep for someone who just wants to know about the differential topology of loop spaces. The statement that the smooth loop space is a smooth manifold appears in Section&#x000A0;42, about two-thirds of the way through the book. Whilst the preceding four hundred pages are not all required reading to get to this point, it is still a somewhat daunting task to extract what one needs for loop spaces.

</p>

<p>Therefore I started writing this document to fill in the details of what I did not have time to say in my seminars. The intention was to provide a more gentle introduction than&#x000A0;[<a href="diffloop8.xhtml#cite.akpm">KM97</a>] but still include the required detail to understand the differential topology of the space of smooth loops. It subsequently grew beyond that remit as I thought of more topics that could be included without increasing the technical difficulty. A brief description of the topics covered is as follows:

</p>

<ol> <li class="listlabel">

<p><span class="listlabel">&#xa7;<a href="diffloop4.xhtml#section.3">3</a></span> The smooth structure of the space of smooth loops in a finite dimensional manifold.

</p>

<p>We start by discussing what it means to be smooth outside the realm of Banach spaces, focusing particularly on the model spaces for loop spaces. Using this we exhibit an atlas for the space of smooth loops and show that the transition functions are smooth. Also in this section we show that various maps involving loop spaces are smooth.
</p>

</li><li class="listlabel">

<p><span class="listlabel">&#xa7;<a href="diffloop5.xhtml#section.4">4</a></span> The basic theory of vector bundles and associated principal and gauge bundles on the loop space defined by looping vector bundles on the original manifold.

</p>

<p>The main theme of this section is that looping something on the original manifold gives a corresponding object on the loop space. Thus the loop space of the tangent space is (diffeomorphic to) the tangent space of the loop space; vector bundles and their frame bundles loop to vector bundles and their frame bundles (in a sense) as do connections. We conclude this section with an important example where this loopy behaviour fails: the loop space of the cotangent bundle is <em>not</em> the cotangent bundle of the loop space.

</p>

</li><li class="listlabel">

<p><span class="listlabel">&#xa7;<a href="diffloop6.xhtml#section.5">5</a></span> Some important submanifolds with tubular neighbourhoods.

</p>

<p>We show that various submanifolds of a loop space have tubular neighbourhoods. In particular, we consider submanifolds defined by imposing some condition on values that the loops can take at certain times - for example, the based loop space - and we consider fixed point submanifolds coming from the circle action. One consequence of this is that the fundamental fibration <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>&#x003A9;</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>L</mi><mi>M</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>M</mi></math> is locally trivial. We conclude with a submanifold that does not have a tubular neighbourhood.

</p>

</li><li class="listlabel">

<p><span class="listlabel">&#xa7;<a href="diffloop7.xhtml#section.6">6</a></span> Basic introductions to two topics of further interest: geometry on loop spaces and the semi-infinite nature of loop spaces.

</p>

<p>We begin with a discussion of some of the issues in infinite dimensional geometry and prove some simple results concerning the Levi-Civita connection and geodesics. We also give a very basic introduction to semi-infinite theory. </p>

</li></ol>

<p>

</p>

<p>This document began life as notes from talks given at NTNU and at Sheffield so I would like to thank the topologists at those institutions, and in particular Nils Baas, for letting me talk about my favourite mathematical subject. I would also like to thank Ralph Cohen and the "loop group" at Stanford.

</p>

<p>This is by no means a finished document, as an example it is somewhat sparse on references. Any comments, suggestions, and constructive criticism will be welcomed.

</p>


</body></html>