<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> <html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" ><head>

<title>The Differential Topology of Loop Spaces </title>

<meta name="Author" content="Andrew Stacey"/><link href="diffloop.css" media="all" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><script src="diffloop.js" type="text/javascript"/></head><body><p><math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline' class='dummy'><mi></mi></math></p><h2 id="section.3">3 Smoothly Does It</h2>

<p>The problem is that once one strays outside the realm of Banach spaces then there are many different ways of defining the derivative. The <em>Historical Remarks</em> at the end of [<a href="diffloop8.xhtml#cite.akpm">KM97</a>, ch I] is a good place to start investigating. For example, one reference is quoted as listing no less than <em>twenty-five</em> inequivalent definitions of the first derivative. Even for Fr&#x000E9;chet spaces - the next "nicest" spaces after Banach spaces, of which the space <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><msup><mi>C</mi> <mn>&#x0221E;</mn></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><msup><mi>S</mi> <mn>1</mn></msup><mo>,</mo><mi>&#x0211D;</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math> is an example - there are three inequivalent definitions of infinite differentiability. Therefore one needs to consider what one wants from calculus before one actually defines it.

</p>

<p>For example, smoothness and continuity are no longer as tightly linked as they are in finite dimensions. Let <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>E</mi></math> be an infinite dimensional locally convex topological vector space that is not normable. That is to say, the the topology on E cannot be given by a single norm. Consider the evaluation map <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>E</mi><mo>&#x02032;</mo><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>E</mi><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>&#x0211D;</mi></math>, <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>f</mi><mo>,</mo><mi>e</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>&#x02192;</mo><mi>f</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>e</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></math>. It is a straightforward result that with the product topology on <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>E</mi><mo>&#x02032;</mo><mo>&#x000D7;</mo><mi>E</mi></math> then this map is not continuous. However, one feels that it ought to be included in any "reasonable" calculus on <math xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML' display='inline'><mi>E</mi></math>.

</p>

<p>Even in the theory of Hilbert spaces one finds that the topology on a topological vector space is not fixed. This becomes particularly obvious when dealing with duality: on the dual space one can discuss the strong topology, the weak topology, the simple topology, the compact topology, and many, many more. The guiding rule is to select the topology most appropriate for the job in hand.

</p>

</body></html>